Title: Bark, George
Author: Jules Feiffer
George’s mother said:
"Bark, George."
George went: "Meow."
"No, George," said George’s mother. 
"Cats go meow. 
Dogs go arf.
Now, bark, George."
George went: "Quack-quack."
"No, George," said George’s mother. 
"Ducks go quack-quack 
Dogs go arf.
Now, bark, George."
George went: "Oink."
"No, George," said George’s mother. 
"Pigs go oink.
Dogs go arf.
Now, bark, George."
George went: "Moo."
George’s mother took George to the vet.
"I’ll soon get to the bottom of this," said the vet.
"Please bark, George."
George went: "Meow."
The vet reached deep down inside of George . . .
And pulled out a cat.
"Bark again, George."
George went: "Quack-quack."
The vet reached deep down inside of George . . .
And pulled out a duck.
"Bark again, George."
George went: "Oink."
The vet reached deep down inside of George . . .
And pulled out a pig.
"Bark again, George."
George went: "Moo."
The vet put on his longest latex glove . . .
Then he reached deep, deep, deep, deep, deep, deep, deep, deep, deep, deep, deep, down inside of George . . .
And pulled out a cow.
"Bark again, George."
George went: arf
George’s mother was so thrilled that she kissed the vet . . .
And the cat.
And the duck.
And the pig.
And the cow.
On the way home, she wanted to show George off to everyone on the street.
So she said, "Bark, George."
And George went:
Hello

Title: Blueberries for Sal
Author: Robert McCloskey
One day, Little Sal went with her mother to Blueberry Hill to pick blueberries.
Little Sal brought along her small tin pail and her mother brought her large tin pail to put berries in.
" We will take our berries home and can them," said her mother.
"Then we will have food for the winter."
Little Sal picked three berries and dropped them in her little tin pail . . . Kuplink, kuplank, kuplunk!
She picked three more berries and ate them. 
Then she picked more berries and dropped one in the pail - kuplunk!
And the rest she ate. 
Then Little Sal ate all four blueberries out of her pail!
Her mother walked slowly through the bushes, picking blueberries as she went and putting them in her pail.
Little Sal struggled along behind, picking blueberries and eating every single one.
Little Sal hurried ahead and dropped a blueberry in her mother’s pail. 
It didn’t sound kuplink! because the bottom of the pail was already covered with berries. 
She reached down inside to get her berry back. 
Though she really didn’t mean to, she pulled out a large handful, because there were so many blueberries right up close to the one she had put in.
Her mother stopped picking and said, "Now, Sal, you run along and pick your own berries. 
Mother wants to take her berries home and can them for next winter."
Her mother went back to her picking, but Little Sal, because her feet were tired of standing and walking, sat down in the middle of a large clump of bushes and ate blueberries.
On the other side of Blueberry Hill, Little Bear came with his mother to eat blueberries.
"Little Bear," she said, "eat lots of berries and grow big and fat. 
We must store up food for the long, cold winter."
Little Bear followed behind his mother as she walked slowly through the bushes eating berries. 
Little Bear stopped now and then to eat berries.
Then he had to hustle along to catch up!
Because his feet were tired of hustling, he picked out a large clump of bushes and sat down right in the middle and ate blueberries.
Over on the other side of the hill, Little Sal ate all of the berries she could reach from where she was sitting, then she started out to find her mother.
She heard a noise from around a rock and thought, "That is my mother walking along!"
But it was a mother crow and her children, and they stopped eating berries and flew away, saying "Caw, Caw, Caw."
Then she heard another noise in the bushes and thought, "That is surely my mother and I will go that way."
But it was Little Bear’s mother instead.
She was tramping along, eating berries, and thinking about storing up food for the winter.
Little Sal tramped right along behind.
By this time, Little Bear had eaten all the berries he could reach without moving from his clump of bushes.
Then he hustled off to catch up with his mother. 
He hunted and hunted but his mother was nowhere to be seen. 
He heard a noise from over a stump and thought, "That is my mother walking along."
But it was a mother partridge and her children. 
They stopped eating berries and hurried away. Then he heard a noise in the bushes and thought, "That is surely my mother.
Then he heard a noise in the bushes and thought, "That is surely my mother.
I will hustle that way!"
But it was Little Sal’s mother instead!
She was walking along, picking berries, and thinking about canning them for next winter.
Little Bear hustled right along behind.
Little Bear and Little Sal’s mother and Little Sal and Little Bear’s mother were all mixed up with each other among the blueberries on Blueberry Hill.
Little Bear’s mother heard Sal walking along behind and thought it was Little Bear and she said, "Little Bear," munch, munch, "Eat all you - " gulp, "can possibly hold!" swallow.
Little Sal said nothing. 
She picked three berries and dropped them, kuplink, kuplank, kuplunk, in her small tin pail.
Little Bear’s mother turned around to see what on earth could make a noise like kuplunk!
"Grumph!" she cried, choking on a mouthful of berries, "This is not my child! 
Where is Little Bear?"
She took one good look and backed away. 
(She was old enough to be shy of people, even a very small person like Little Sal.) 
Then she turned around and walked off very fast to hunt for Little Bear.
Little Sal’s mother heard Little Bear tramping along behind and thought it was Little Sal. 
She kept right on picking and thinking about canning blueberries for next winter.
Little Bear padded up and peeked into her pail. 
Of course, he only wanted to taste a few of what was inside, but there were so many and they were so close together, that he tasted a Tremendous Mouthful by mistake. 
"Now, Sal," said Little Sal’s mother without turning around, "you run along and pick your own berries. 
Mother wants to can these for next winter." 
Little Bear tasted another Tremendous Mouthful, and almost spilled the entire pail of blueberries!
Little Sal’s mother turned around and gasped, "My Goodness, you are not Little Sal!
Where, oh where, is my child?"
Little Bear just sat munching and munching and swallowing and licking his lips.
Little Sal’s mother slowly backed away.
(she was old enough to be shy of bears, even very small bears like Little Bear.) 
Then she turned and walked away quickly to look for Little Sal.
She hadn’t gone very far before she heard a kuplink! kuplank! kuplunk!
She knew just what made that kind of a noise!
Little Bear’s mother had not hunted very long before she heard a hustling sound that stopped now and then to munch and swallow.
She knew just what made that kind of a noise!
Little Bear and his mother went home down one side of Blueberry Hill, eating blueberries all the way, and full of food stored up for next winter.
And Little Sal and her mother went down the other side of Blueberry Hill, picking berries all the way, and drove home with food to can for next winter - a whole pail of blueberries and three more besides.

Title: Brown Bear, Brown Bear, What Do You See?
Author: Bill Martin Jr
Brown Bear, Brown Bear, What do you see?
I see a red bird looking at me.
Red Bird, Red Bird, What do you see?
I see a yellow duck looking at me.
Yellow Duck, Yellow Duck,  What do you see?
I see a blue horse looking at me.
Blue Horse, Blue Horse,  What do you see?
I see a green frog looking at me.
Green Frog, Green Frog,  What do you see?
I see a purple cat looking at me.
Purple Cat, Purple Cat,  What do you see?
I see a white dog looking at me.
White Dog, White Dog, What do you see?
I see a black sheep looking at me.
Black Sheep, Black Sheep,  What do you see?
I see a goldfish looking at me.
Goldfish, Goldfish,  What do you see?
I see a teacher looking at me.
Teacher, Teacher, What do you see?
I see children looking at me.
Children, Children,  What do you see?
We see a brown bear, a red bird, a green frog, a black sheep, a goldfish, a yellow duck, a blue horse, a purple cat, a white dog and a teacher looking at us.
That’s what we see.

Title: Click, Clack, Moo Cows that Type
Author: Doreen Cronin
Farmer Brown has a problem.
His cows like to type.
All day long he hears
Click, clack, moo.
Click, clack, moo.
Click, clack, moo.
At first, he couldn’t believe his ears.
Cows that type?
Impossible!
Click, clack, moo.
Click, clack, moo.
Click, clack, moo.
Then, he couldn’t believe his eyes.
Dear Farmer Brown,
The barn is very cold at night.
We’d like some electric blankets.
Sincerely, The Cows
It was bad enough the cows had found the old typewriter in the barn, now they wanted electric blankets!
"No way," saud Farmer Brown.
"No electric blankets."
So the cows went on strike.
The left a note on the barn door.
Sorry.
We’re closed.
No milk today.
"No milk today!" cried Farmer Brown.
In the background, he heard the cows busy at work:
Click, clack, moo.
Click, clack, moo.
Click, clack, moo.
The next day, he got another note:
Dear Farmer Brown,
The hens are cold too.
They’d like electric blankets.
Sincerely, The Cows
The cows were growing impatient with the farmer.
They left a new note on the barn door.
Closed.
No milk.
No eggs.
"No eggs!" cried Farmer Brown.
In the background he heard them.
Click, clack, moo.
Click, clack, moo.
Click, clack, moo.
"Cows that type.
Hens on strike!
Whoever heard of such a thing?
How can I run a farm with no milk and no eggs!"
Farmer Brown was furious.
Farmer Brown got out his own typewriter.
Dear Cows and Hens:
There will be no electric blankets.
You are cows and hens.
I demand milk and eggs.
Sincerely, Farmer Brown
Duck was a neutral party, so he brought the ultimatium to the cows.
The cows held an emergency meeting.
All the animals gathered around the barn to snoop, but none of them could understand Moo.
All night long, Farmer Brown waited for an answer.
Duck knocked on the door early the next morning.
He handed Farmer Brown a note:
Dear Farmer Brown,
We will exchange our typewriter for electric blankets.
Leave them outside the barn door and we will send Duck over with the typewriter.
Sincerely, The Cows
Farmer Brown decided this was a good deal.
He left the blankets next to the barn door and waited for Duck to come with the typewriter.
The next morning he got a note:
Dear Farmer Brown,
The pond is quite boring.
We’d like a diving board.
Sincerely, The Ducks
Click, clack, quack.
Click, clack, quack.
Click, clack, quack.

Title: Cloudy With a Chance of Meatballs
Author: Judi Barrett
We were all sitting around the big kitchen table.
It was Saturday morning.
Pancake morning.
Mom was squeezing oranges for juice.
Henry and I were betting on how many pancakes we each could eat.
And grandpa was doing the flipping.
Seconds later, something flew through the air headed toward the kitchen ceiling . . . and landed right on Henry.
After we realized that the flying object was only a pancake, we all laughed, even Grandpa.
Breakfast continued quite uneventfully.
All the other pancakes landed in the pan.
And all of them were eaten, even the one that landed on Henry.
That night, touched off by the pancake incident at breakfast, Grandpa told us the best tall-tale bedtime story he’d ever told.
"Across an ocean, over lots of huge bumpy mountains, across three hot deserts, and one smaller ocean . . . there lay the tiny town of Chewandswallow.
In most ways, it was very much like any other tiny town.
It had a Main Street lined with stores, houses with trees and gardens around them, a schoolhouse, about three hundred people, and some assorted cats and dogs.
But there were no food stores in the town of Chewandswallow.
They didn’t need any.
The sky supplied all the food they could possibly want.
The only thing that was really different about Chewandswallow was its weather.
It came three times a day, at breakfast, lunch, and dinner.
Everything that everyone ate came from the sky.
Whatever the weather served, that was what they ate.
But it never rained rain.
It never snowed snow.
And it never blew just wind.
It rained things like soup and juice.
It snowed mashed potatoes and green peas.
And sometimes the wind blew in storms of hamburgers.
The people could watch the weather report on television in the morning and they would even hear a prediction for the next day’s food.
When the townspeople went outside, they carried their plates, cups, glasses, forks, spoons, knives and napkins with them.  
That way they would always be prepared for any kind of weather.
If there were leftovers, and there usually were, the people took them home and put them in their refrigerators in case they got hungry between meals.
The menu varied.
By the time they woke up in the morning, breakfast was coming down.
After a brief shower of orange juice, low clouds of sunny-side up eggs moved in followed by pieces of toast.
Butter and jelly sprinkled down for the toast.
And most of the time it rained milk afterwards.
For lunch one day, frankfurters, already in their rolls, blew in from the northwest at about five miles an hour.
There were mustard clouds nearby.
Then the wind shifted to the east and brought in baked beans.
A drizzle of soda finished off the meal.
Dinner one night consisted of lamb chops, becoming heavy at times, with occasional ketchup.
Periods of peas and baked potatoes were followed by gradual clearing, with a wonderful Jell-O setting in the west.
The Sanitation Department of Chewandswallow had a rather unusual job for a sanitation department.
It had to remove the goods that fell on the houses and sidewalks and lawns.
The workers cleaned things up after every meal and fed all the dogs and cats.
Then they emptied some of it into the surrounding oceans for the fish and turtles and whales to eat.
The rest of the food was put back into the earth so that the soil would be richer for the people’s flower gardens.
Life for the townspeople was delicious until the weather took a turn for the worse.
One day there was nothing but Gorgonzola cheese all day long.
The next day there was only broccoli, all overcooked.
And the next day there were brussel sprouts and peanut butter with mayonnaise.
Another day there was a pea soup fog.
No one could see where they were going and they could barely find the rest of the meal that got stuck in the fog.
The food was getting larger and larger, and so were the portions.
The people were getting frightened.
Violent storms blew up frequently.
Awful things were happening.
One Tuesday there was a hurricane of bread and rolls all day long and into the night.
There were soft rolls and hard rolls, some with seeds and some without.
There was white bread and rye and whole wheat toast.
Most of it was larger than they had ever seen bread and rolls before.
It was a terrible day.
Everyone had to stay indoors.
Roofs were damaged, and the Sanitation Department was beside itself.
The mess took the workers four days to clean up, and the sea was full of floating rolls.
To help out, the people piled up as much bread as they could in their backyards.
The birds picked at it a bit, but it just stayed there and got staler and staler.
There was a storm of pancakes one morning and a downpour of maple syrup that nearly flooded the town.  
A huge pancake covered the school.
No one could get it off because of its weight, so they had to close the school.
Lunch one day brought fifteen-inch drifts of cream cheese and jelly sandwiches.
Everyone ate themselves sick and the day ended with a stomachache.
There was an awful salt and pepper wind accompanied by an even worse tornado.
People were sneezing themselves silly and running to avoid the tomatoes.
The town was a mess.
There were seeds and pulp everywhere.
The sanitation department gave up.
The job was too big.
Everyone feared for their lives.
They couldn’t go outside most of the time.
Many houses had been badly damaged by giant meatballs, stores were boarded up and there was no more school for the children.
So a decision was made to abandon the town of Chewandswallow.
It was a matter of survival.
The people glued together giant pieces of stale bread sandwich-style with peanut butter . . . took the absolute necessities with them, and set sail on their rafts for a new land.
After being afloat for a week, they finally reached a small coastal town, which welcomed them.
The bread had held up surprisingly well, well enough for them to build temporary houses for themselves out of it.
The children began school again, and the adults all tried to find places for themselves in the new land.
The biggest change they had to make was getting used to buying food at a supermarket.
The found it odd that food was kept on shelves, packaged in boxes, cans and bottles.  
Meat that had to be cooked was kept in large refrigerators.
Nothing came down from the sky except rain and snow.
The clouds above their heads were not made of fried eggs.
No one ever got hit by a hamburger again.
And nobody dared to go back to Chewandswallow to find out what had happened to it.
They were too afraid."
Henry and I were awake until the very end of Grandpa’s story.
I remember his goodnight kiss.
The next morning we woke up to see snow falling outside our window.
We ran downstairs for breakfast and ate it a little faster than usual so we could go sledding with Grandpa.
It’s funny, but even as we were sliding down the hill we thought we saw a giant pat of butter at the top, and we could almost smell the mashed potatoes.
The End

Title: Corduroy
Author: Don Freeman
Corduroy is a bear who once lived in the toy department of a big store.
Day after day he waited with all the other animals and dolls for somebody to come along and take him home.
The store was always filled with shoppers buying all sorts of things, but no one ever seemed to want a small bear in green overalls.
Then one morning a little girl stopped and looked straight into Corduroy’s bright eyes.
"Oh, Mommy!" she said. 
"Look! There’s the very bear I’ve always wanted."
"Not today, dear." 
Her mother sighed. 
"I’ve spent too much already.
Besides, he doesn’t look new. 
He’s lost the button to one of his shoulder straps."
Corduroy watched them sadly as they walked away.
"l didn’t know I’d lost a button," he said to himself.
"Tonight I’ll go and see if I can find it."
Late that evening, when all the shoppers had gone and the doors were shut and locked, Corduroy climbed carefully down from his shelf and began searching everywhere on the floor for his lost button.
Suddenly he felt the floor moving under him!
Quite by accident he had stepped onto an escalator- and up he went!
"Could this be a mountain?" he wondered.
"I think I’ve always wanted to climb a mountain."
He wandered around admiring the furniture.
"This must be a bed," he said.
"I’ve always wanted to sleep in a bed."
And up he crawled onto a large, thick mattress.
All at once he saw something small and round.
"Why, here’s my button!" he cried.
And he tried to pick it up.
But, like all the other buttons on the mattress, it was tied down tight.
He yanked and pulled with both paws until pop!
Off came the button - and off the mattress Corduroy toppled, bang into a tall floor lamp.
Over it fell with a crash!
Corduroy didn’t know it, but there was someone else awake in the store. 
The night watchman was doing his rounds on the floor above.
When he heard the crash he came dashing down the escalator.
"Now who in the world did that!" he exclaimed.
"Somebody must be hiding around here!"
He flashed his light under and over sofas and beds until he came to the biggest bed of all. 
And there he saw two fuzzy brown ears sticking up from under the cover.
"Hello!" he said.
"How did you get upstairs?"
The watchman tucked Corduroy under his arm and carried him down the escalator and set him on the shelf in the toy department with the other animals and dolls.
Corduroy was just waking up when the first customers came into the store in the morning. 
And there, looking at him with a wide, warm smile, was the same little girl he’d seen only the day before.
"I’m Lisa," she said, "and you’re going to be my very own bear. 
Last night I counted what I’ve saved in my piggy bank and my mother said I could bring you home."
"Shall I put him in a box for you?" the saleslady asked.
"Oh, no thank you," Lisa answered.
And she carried Corduroy home in her arms.
She ran all the way up four flights of stairs, into her family’s apartment, and straight to her own room.
Corduroy blinked.
There was a chair and a chest of drawers, and alongside a girl-size bed stood a little bed just the right size for him.
The room was small, nothing like that enormous palace in the department store.
"This must be home," he said. 
"I know I’ve always wanted a home!"
Lisa sat down with Corduroy on her lap and began to sew a button on his overalls.
"I like you the way you are," she said, "but you’ll be more comfortable with your shoulder strap fastened."
"You must be a friend," said Corduroy. 
"I’ve always wanted a friend."
"Me too!" said Lisa, and gave him a big hug.

Title: Curious George
Author: H.A. Rey
This is George.
He lived in Africa.
He was a good little monkey and always very curious.
One day George saw a man.
He had on a large yellow straw hat.
The man saw George too.
"What a nice little monkey," he thought.
"I would like to take him home with me."
He put his hat on the ground and, of course, George was curious.
He came down from the tree to look at the large yellow hat.
The hat had been on the man’s head.
George thought it would be nice to have it on his own head.
He picked it up and put it on.
The hat covered George’s head.
He couldn’t see.
The man picked him up quickly and popped him into a bag.
George was caught.
The man with the big yellow hat put George into a little boat, and a sailor rowed them both across the water to a big ship.
George was sad, but he was still a little curious.
On the big ship, things began to happen.
The man took off the bag.
George sat on a little stool and the man said, "George, I am going to take you to a big Zoo in a big city. 
You will like it there.
Now run along and Play, but don’t get into trouble"’
George promised to be good.
But it is easy for little monkeys to forget.
On the deck he found some sea gulls.
He wondered how they could fly.
He was very curious.
Finally he HAD to try.
It looked easy. 
But - 
oh, what happened!
First this - and then this!
"WHERE IS GEORGE?"
The sailors looked and looked.
At last they saw him struggling in the water, and almost all tired out.
"Man overboard!" the sailors cried as they threw him a lifebelt.
George caught it and held on.
At last he was safe on board.
After that George was more careful to be a good monkey, until, at last, the long trip was over.
George said good-bye to the kind sailors, and he and the man with the yellow hat walked off the ship on to the shore and on into the city to the man’s house.
After a good meal and a good pipe George felt very tired.
He crawled into bed and fell asleep at once.
The next morning the man telephoned the Zoo.
George watched him.
He was fascinated.
Then the man went away.
George was curious.
He wanted to telephone, too.
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven.
What fun!
DING-A-LING-A-LING!
GEORGE HAD TELEPHONED THE FIRE STATION!
The firemen rushed to the telephone.
"Hello! Hello!" they said.
But there was no answer.
Then they looked for the signal on the big map that showed where the telephone call had come from.
They didn’t know it was GEORGE.
They thought it was a teal fire.
Hurry!
Hurry!
Hurry!
The firemen jumped on to the fire engines and on to the hook- and-ladders.
Ding-dong-ding-dong.
Everyone out of the way!
Hurry!
Hurry!
Hurry!
The firemen rushed into the house.
They opened the door.
NO FIRE!
ONLY a naughty little monkey.
"Oh, catch him, catch him," they cried.
George tried to run away.
He almost did, but he got caught in the telephone wire, and – a thin fireman caught one arm and a fat fireman caught the other.
"You fooled the fire department, "they said. 
"We will have to shut you up where you can’t do any more harm."
They took him away and shut him in a prison.
George wanted to get out.
He climbed up to the window to try the bars.
Just then the watchman came in.
He got on the wooden bed to catch George.
But he was too big and heavy.
The bed tipped up, the watchman fell over, and, quick as lightning, George ran out through the open door.
He hurried through the building and out on to the roof. 
And then he was lucky to be a monkey: out he walked on to the telephone wires.
Quickly and quietly over the guard’s head, George walked away.
He was free!
Down in the street outside the Prison wall, stood a balloon man.
A little girl bought a balloon for her brother.
George watched.
He was curious again.
He felt he MUST have a bright red balloon.
He reached over and tried to help himself, but – instead of one balloon, the whole bunch broke loose.
In an instant the wind whisked them all away and, with them, went George, holding tight with both hands.
Up, up he sailed, higher and higher.
The houses looked like toy houses and the people like dolls.
George was frightened.
He held on very tight.
At first the wind blew in great gusts.
Then it quieted.
Finally it sropped blowing altogether.
George was very tired.
Down, down he went - bump, on to the top of a traffic light.
Everyone was surprised.
The traffic got all mixed up.
George didn’t know what to do, and then he heard someone call, "GEORGE!"
He looked down and saw his friend, the man with the big yellow hat!
George was very happy.
The man was happy roo.
George slid down the post and the man with the big yellow hat put him under his arm, Then he paid the balloon man for all the balloons.
And then George and the man climbed into the car and at last, away they went to the ZOO!
What a nice place for George to live!

Title: Love You Forever
Author:Sheila McGraw
A mother held her new baby and very slowly rocked him back and forth, back and forth, back and forth.
And while she held him, she sang: I’ll love you forever, I’ll like you for always, as long as I’m living my baby you’ll be.
The baby grew. 
He grew and he grew and he grew.
He grew until he was two years old, and he ran all around the house. 
He grew until he was two years old, and he ran all around the house. 
He pulled all the food out of the refrigerator and he took his mother’s watch and flushed it down the toilet.
Sometimes his mother would say, "This kid is driving me CRAZY!"
But at night time, when that two-year old was quiet, she opened the door to his room, crawled across the floor, looked up over the side of his bed; and if he was really asleep she picked him up and rocked him back and forth, back and forth, back and forth.
While she rocked him she sang: I’ll love you forever, I’ll like you for always, as long as I’m living my baby you’ll be.
The little boy grew. 
He grew and he grew and he grew.
He grew until he was nine years old.
And he never wanted to come in for dinner, he never wanted to take a bath, and when grandma visited he always said bad words. 
Sometimes his mother wanted to sell him to the zoo!
But at nighttime, when he was asleep, the mother quietly opened the door to his room, crawled across the floor and looked up over the side of the bed.
If he was really asleep, she picked up that nine-year-old boy and rocked him back and forth, back and forth, back and forth. 
And while she rocked him, she sang: I’ll love you forever, I’ll like you for always, as long as I’m living my baby you’ll be.
The boy grew. 
He grew and he grew and he grew. 
He grew until he was a teenager. 
He had strange friends and he wore strange clothes and he listened to strange music. 
Sometimes the mother felt like she was in a zoo!
But at nighttime, when that teenager was asleep, the mother opened the door to his room, crawled across the floor and looked up over the side of the bed. 
If he was really asleep she picked up that great big boy and rocked him back and forth, back and forth, back and forth. 
While she rocked him she sang: I’ll love you forever, I’ll like you for always, as long as I’m living my baby you’ll be.
That teenager grew. 
He grew and he grew and he grew. 
He grew until he was a grown-up man. 
He left home and got a house across town.
But sometimes on dark nights the mother got into her car and drove across town.
If all the lights in her son’s house were out, she opened his bedroom window, crawled across the floor, and looked up over the side of his bed.
If that great big man was really asleep she picked him up and rocked him back and forth, back and forth, back and forth. 
And while she rocked him she sang: I’ll love you forever, I’ll like you for always, as long as I’m living my baby you’ll be.
Well, that mother, she got older. 
She got older and older and older. 
One day she called up her son and said, "You’d better come see me because I’m very old and sick."
So her son came to see her.
When he came in the door she tried to sing the song. 
She sang: I’ll love you forever; I’ll like you for always. . . 
But she couldn’t finish because she was too old and sick. 
The son went to his mother.
He picked her up and rocked her back and forth, back and forth, back and forth.
And he sang this song: I’ll love you forever, I’ll like you for always, as long as I’m living my Mommy you’ll be.
When the son came home that night, he stood for a long rime at the top of the stairs.
Then he went into the room where his very new baby daughter was sleeping. 
He picked her up in his arms and very slowly rocked her back and forth, back and forth, back and forth.
And while he rocked her he sang. 
I’ll love you forever, I’ll like you for always, as long as I’m living my baby you’ll be.

Title: The Carrot Seed
Author: Ruth Krauss
A little boy planted a carrot seed.
His mother said, "I’m afraid it won’t come up."
His father said, "Im afraid it won’t come up."
And his big brother said, "It won’t come up"
Every day the little boy pulled up the weeds around the seed and sprinkled the ground with water.
But nothing came up.
And nothing came up.
Everyone kept saying it wouldn’t come up.
But he still pulled up the weeds around it every day and sprinkled the ground with water.
Ande then one day, a carrot came up just as the little boy had known it would.

Title: The snowy Day
Author: Ezra Jack Keats
One winter morning Peter woke up and looked out the window.
Snow had fallen during the night.
It covered everything as far as he could see.
After breakfast he put on his snowsuit and ran outside.
The snow was piled up very high along the street to make a path for walking.
Crunch, crunch, crunch, his feet sank into the snow.
He walked with his toes pointing out, like this:
He walked with his toes pointing in like that:
Then he dragged his feet s-l-o-w-l-y to make tracks.
And he found something sticking out of the snow that made a new track.
I was a stick- a stick that was just right for smacking a snow-covered tree
Down fell the snow - plop! - on top of Peter’s head.
He thought it would be fun to join the big boys in their snowball fight, but he knew he wasn’t old enough- not yet.
So he made a smiling snowman and he made angels.
He pretended he was a mountain-climber.
He climbed up a great big tall heaping mound of snow- and slid all the way down.
He picked up a handful of snow- and another, and still another.
He packed it round and firm and put the snowball in his pocket for tomorrow.
Then he went into his warm house. 
He told his mother all about his adventures while she took off his wet socks.
And he thought and thought and thought about them.
Before he got into bed he looked in his pocket.
His pocket was empty.
The snowball wasn’t there.
He felt very sad.
While he slept, he dreamed that the sun had melted all the snow away.
But when he woke up his dream was gone.
The snow was still everywhere.
New snow was falling.
After breakfast he called to his friend from across the hall, and they went out together into the deep, deep snow.

Title: Caps for Sale
Author: Esphyr Slobodkina
Once there was a peddler who sold caps. 
But he was not like an ordinary peddler carrying his wares on his back.
 He carried them on top of his head.
First he had on his own checked cap, then a bunch of gray caps, then a bunch of brown caps, then a bunch of blue caps, and on the very top a bunch of red caps.
He walked up and down the streets, holding himself very straight so as not to upset his caps.
As he went along he called, "Caps! 
Caps for sale! 
Fifty cents a cap!"
One morning he couldn’t sell any caps. 
He walked up the street and he walked down the street calling, "Caps! 
Caps for sale. 
Fifty cents a cap."
But nobody wanted any caps that morning. 
Nobody wanted even a red cap.
He began to feel very hungry, but he had no money for lunch.
"I think I’ll go for a walk in the country," said he. 
And he walked out of town - slowly, slowly, so as not to upset his caps.
He walked for a long time until he came to a great big tree.
"That’s a nice place for a rest," thought he.
And he sat down very slowly, under the tree and leaned hack little by little against the tree-trunk so as not to disturb the caps on his head.
Then he put up his hand to feel if they were straight - first his own checked cap, then the gray caps, then the brown caps, then the blue caps, then the red caps on the very top.
They were all there.
So he went to sleep.
He slept for a long time.
When he woke up he was refreshed and rested.
But before standing up he felt with his hand to make sure his caps were in the right place.
All he felt was his own checked cap!
He looked to the right of him.
No Caps.
He looked to the left of him.
No caps.
He looked in back of him.
No caps.
He looked behind the tree.
No caps.
Then he looked up into the tree.
And what do you think he saw?
On every branch sat a monkey. 
On every monkey was a gray, or a brown, or a blue, or a red cap!
The peddler looked at the monkeys.
The monkeys looked at the peddler.
He didn’t know what to do.
Finally he spoke to them.
"You monkeys, you," he said, shaking a finger at them, "you give me back my caps."
But the monkeys only shook their fingers back at him and said, "Tsz, tsz, tsz."
This made the peddler angry, so he shook both hands at them and said, "You monkeys, you! 
You give me back my caps."
But the monkeys only shook both their hands back at him and said, "Tsz, tsz, tsz."
Now he felt quite angry. 
He stamped his foot, and he said, "You monkeys, you! 
You better give me back my caps!"
But the monkeys only stamped their feet back at him and said, "Tsz, tsz, tsz."
By this time the peddler was really very, very angry. 
He stamped both his feet and shouted, "You monkeys, you! 
You must give me back my caps!"
But the monkeys only stamped both their feet back at him and said, "Tsz, tsz, tsz."
At last he became so angry that he pulled off his own cap, threw it on the ground, and began to walk away.
But then, each monkey pulled off his cap. . .  and all the gray caps, and all the brown caps, and all the blue caps, and all the red caps came flying down out of the tree.
So the peddler picked up his caps and put them back on his head – first his own checked cap, then the gray caps, then the brown caps, then the blue caps, then the red caps on the very top. 
And slowly, slowly, he walked back to town calling, "Caps!
Caps for sale!
Fifty cents a cap!"

Title: Guess How Much I Love You
Author: Sam McBratney
Little Nutbrown Hare, who was going to bed, held on tight to Big Nutbrown Hare’s very long ears.
He wanted to be sure that Big Nutbrown Hare was listening. 
"Guess how much I love you," he said.
"Oh, I don’t think I could guess that," said Big Nutbrown Hare.
"This much," said Little Nutbrown Hare, stretching out his arms as wide as they could go. 
Big Nutbrown Hare had even longer arms. 
But I love you this much, he said.
Hmm, that is a lot, thought Little Nutbrown Hare.
"I love you as high as I can reach," said Little Nutbrown Hare.
"I love you as high as I can reach," said Big Nutbrown Hare.
That is very high thought Little Nutbrown Hare, I wish I had arms like that. 
Then Little Nutbrown Hare had a good idea.
He tumbled upside down and reached up the tree trunk with his feet.
"I love you all the way up to my toes!" he said.
"And, I love you all the way up to your toes," said Big Nutbrown Hare, swinging him up over his head.
"I love you as high as I can hop!" laughed Little Nutbrown Hare, bouncing up and down.
"But I love you as high as I can hop," smiled Big Nutbrown Hare - and he hopped so high that his ears touched the branches above.
That’s good hopping, thought Little Nutbrown Hare. 
I wish I could hop like that.
"I love you all the way down the lane as far as the river," cried Little Nutbrown Hare.
"I love you across the river and over the hills," said Big Nutbrown Hare. 
That’s very far, thought Little Nutbrown Hare.
He was almost too sleepy to think anymore.
Then he looked beyond the thornbushes, out into the big dark night. 
Nothing could be farther than the sky.
"I love you right up to the moon" he said, and closed his eyes.
"Oh, that’s far," said Big Nutbrown Hare.
"That is very, very far."
Big Nutbrown Hare settled Little Nutbrown Hare into his bed of leaves.
He leaned over and kissed him good night.
Then he lay down close by and whispered with a smile, "I love you right up to the moon and back."

Title: Harold and the Purple Crayon
Author: Crockett Johnson
One evening, after thinking it over for some time, Harold decided to go for, a walk in the moonlight.
There wasn’t any moon, and Harold needed a moon for a walk in the moonlight. 
And he needed something to walk on.
He made a long straight path so he wouldn’t get lost.
And he set off on his walk, taking his big purple crayon with him.
But he didn’t seem to be getting anywhere on the long straight path. 
So he left the path for a short cut across a field. 
And the moon went with him.
The short cut led right to where Harold thought a forest ought to be.
He didn’t want to get lost in the woods.
So he made a very small forest, with just one tree in it.
It turned out to be an apple tree.
The apples would be very tasty, Harold thought, when they got red. 
So he put a frightening dragon under the tree to guard the apples.
It was a terribly frightening dragon.
It even frightened Harold. 
He backed away.
His hand holding the purple crayon shook.
Suddenly he realized what was happening.
But by then Harold was over his head in an ocean.
He came up thinking fast.
And in no time he was climbing aboard a trim little boat.
He quickly set sail.
And the moon sailed along with him.
After he had sailed long enough, Harold made land without much trouble.
He stepped ashore on the beach, wondering where he was.
The sandy beach reminded Harold of picnics. 
And the thought of picnics made him hungry. 
So he laid out a nice simple picnic lunch.
There was nothing but pie. 
But there were all nine kinds of pie that Harold liked best.
When Harold finished his picnic there was quite a lot left.
He hated to see so much delicious pie go to waste.
So Harold left a very hungry moose and a deserving porcupine to finish it up. 
And, off he went, looking for a hill to climb, to see where he was.
Harold knew that the higher up he went the farther he could see. 
So he decided to make the hill into a mountain.
If he went high enough, he thought, he could see the window of his bedroom. 
He was tired and he felt he ought to be getting to bed.
He hoped he could see his bedroom window from the top of the mountain. 
But as he looked down over the other side he slipped – 
And there wasn’t any other side of the mountain. 
He was falling, in thin air.
But, luckily, he kept his wits and his purple crayon.
He made a balloon and he grabbed on to it. 
And he made a basket under the balloon big enough to stand in.
He had a fine view from the balloon but he couldn’t see his window. 
He couldn’t even see a house.
So he made a house, with windows. 
And he landed the balloon on the grass in the front yard.
None of the windows was his window. 
He tried to think where his window ought to be. 
He made some more windows. 
He made a big building full of windows.
He made lots of building full of windows. 
He made a whole city full of windows. 
But none of the windows was his window. 
He couldn’t think where it might be.
He decided to ask a policeman. 
The policeman pointed the way Harold was going anyway.
But Harold thanked him.
And he walked along with the moon, wishing he was in his room and in bed. 
Then, suddenly, Harold remembered.
He remembered where his bedroom window was, when there was a moon.
It was always right around the moon.
And then Harold made his bed.
He got in it and drew up the covers. 
The purple crayon dropped on the floor. And Harold dropped off to sleep. 
And Harold dropped off to sleep.

Title: The Keeping Quilt
Author: Patricia Polacco
When my Great Gramma Anna came to America, she wore the same thick overcoat and big boots he had worn for farm work.
But her family weren’t dirt farmers anymore. 
In New York City her father’s work was hauling things on a wagon, and the rest of the family made artificial flowers all day.
Everyone was in a hurry, and it was so crowded, not like in backhome Russia.
But all the same it was their home, and most of their neighbors were just like them. 
When Anna went to school, English sounded to her like pebbles dropping into shallow water. 
Shhhhhh.. . .  Shhhhhh.. . .  Shhhhhh.
In six months she was speaking English. 
Her parents almost never learned, so she spoke English for them, too.
The only things she had left of backhome Russia were her dress and the babushka she liked to throw up into the air when she was dancing.
And her dress was getting too small. 
After her mother had sewn her a new one, she took her old dress and babushka. 
Then from a basket of old clothes she took Uncle Vladimir’s shirt, Aunt Havalah’s nightdress, and an apron of Aunt Natasha’s. 
"We will make a quilt to help us always remember home," Anna’s mother said. 
"It will be like having the family in backhome Russia dance around us at night."
And so it was.
Anna’s mother invited all the neighborhood ladies. 
They cut out animals and flowers from the scraps of clothing.
Anna kept the needles threaded and handed them to the ladies as they needed them.
The border of the quilt was made of Anna’s babushka. 
On Friday nights Anna’s mother would say the prayers that started the Sabbath. 
The family ate challah and chicken soup. 
The quilt was the tablecloth.
Anna grew up and fell in love with Great-Grandpa Sasha.
To show he wanted to be her husband, he gave Anna a gold coin, a dried flower, and a piece of rock salt, all tied into a linen handkerchief.
The gold was for wealth, the flower for love, and the salt so their lives would have flavor.
She accepted the hankie.
They were engaged.
Under the wedding huppa, Anna and Sasha promised each other love and understanding.
After the wedding, the men and women celebrated separately. 
When my Grandma Carle was born, Anna wrapped her daughter in the quilt to welcome her warmly into the world. 
Carle was given a gift of gold, flower, salt, and bread.
Gold so she would never know poverty, a flower so she would always know love, salt so her life would always have flavor, and bread so that she would never know hunger. 
Carle learned to keep the Sabbath and to cook and clean and do washing.
"Married you’ll be someday," Anna told Carle, and. . . 
again the quilt became a wedding huppa, this time for Carle’s wedding to Grandpa George. 
Men and women celebrated together, but they still did not dance together. 
In Carle’s wedding bouquet was a gold coin, bread, and salt.
Carle and George moved to a farm in Michigan and Great-Gramma Anna came to live with them. 
The quilt once again wrapped a new little girl, Mary Ellen.
Mary Ellen called Anna, Lady Gramma. 
She had grown very old and was sick a lot of the time. 
The quilt kept her legs warm.
On Anna’s ninety-eighth birthday, the cake was a kulich, a rich cake with raisins and candied fruit in it. 
When Great-Gramma Anna died, prayers were said to lift her soul to heaven.
My mother Mary Ellen was now grown up. 
When Mary Ellen left home, she took the quilt with her. 
When she became a bride, the quilt became her huppa. 
For the first time, friends who were not Jews came to the wedding. 
My mother wore a suit, but in her bouquet were gold, bread, and salt. 
The quilt, welcomed me, Patricia, into the world. . . 
And it was the tablecloth for my first birthday party.
At night I would trace my fingers around the edges of each animal on the quilt before I went to sleep. 
I told my mother stories about the animals on the quilt. 
She told me whose sleeve had made the horse, whose
apron had made the chicken, whose dress had made the flowers and whose babushka went around the edge of the quilt.
The quilt was a pretend cape when I was in the bullring, or sometimes a tent in the steaming Amazon jungle. 
At my wedding to Enzo-Mario, men and women danced together. 
In my bouquet were gold, bread, and salt-and a sprinkle of wine, so I would always know laughter.
Twenty years ago I held Traci Denise in the quilt for the first time.
Someday she, too, will leave home and she will take the quilt with her.

Title: The Other Side
Author: Jacqueline Woodson
That summer the fence that stretched through our town seemed bigger.
We lived in a yellow house on one side of it.
White people lived on the other.
And Mama said, "Don’t climb over that fence when you play." 
She said it wasn’t safe.
That summer there was a girl who wore a pink sweater.
Each morning she climbed up on the fence and stared over at our side.
Sometimes I stared back.
She never sat on that fence with anybody, that girl didn’t.
Once, when we were jumping rope, she asked if she could play.
And my friend Sandra said no without even asking the rest of us.
I don’t know what I would have said.
Maybe yes. 
Maybe no.
That summer everyone and everything on the other side of that fence seemed far away.
When I asked my mama why, she said, "Because that’s the way things have always been."
Sometimes when me and Mama went into town, I saw that girl with her mama.
She looked sad sometimes, that girl did.
"Don’t stare," my mama said. "It’s not polite."
It rained a lot that summer.
On rainy days that girl sat on the fence in a raincoat.
She let herself get all wet and acted like she didn’t even care.
Sometimes I saw her dancing around in puddles, splashing and laughing. 
Mama wouldn’t let me go out in the rain.
"That’s why I bought you rainy-day toys," my mama said.
"You stay inside here-where it’s warm and safe and dry."
But every time it rained, I looked for that girl.
And I always found her.
Somewhere near the fence.
Someplace in the middle of the summer, the rain stopped. 
When I walked outside, the grass was damp and the sun was already high up in the sky.
And I stood there with my hands up in the air.
I felt brave that day. 
I felt free. 
I got close to the fence and that girl asked me my name.
"Clover" I said.
"My name’s Annie," she said. 
Annie Paul."
"I live over yonder," she said, "by where you see the laundry. 
That’s my blouse hanging on the line."
She smiled then. 
She had a pretty smile.
And then I smiled. And we stood there Iooking at each other, smiling.
"lt’s nice up on this fence," Annie said.
"You can see all over."
I ran my hand along the fence.
I reached up and touched the top of it.
"A fence like this was made for sitting on," Annie said. 
She looked at me sideways.
"My mama Says I shouldn’t go on the other side," I said.
"My mama says the same thing. But she never said nothing about sitting on it."
"Neither did mine," I said.
That summer me and Annie sat together on that fence.
And when Sandra and them looked at me funny, I just made believe I didn’t care.
Some mornings my mama watched us.
I waited for her to tell me to get down from that fence before I break my neck or something.
But she never did.
"l see you made a new friend," she said one morning.
And I nodded and Mama smiled.
That summer me and Annie sat on that fence and watched the whole wide world around us.
One day Sandra and them were jumping rope near the fence and we asked if we could play.
"I don’t care," Sandra said.
And when we jumped, Sandra and me were partners, the way we used to be.
When we were too tired to jump anymore, we sat up on the fence, all of us in a long line.
"Someday somebody’s going to come along and knock this old fence down," Annie said. 
And I nodded.
"Yeah," I said.
"Someday."

Title: Good Night Gorilla
Author: Peggy Rathman
Good night, Gorilla.
Good night, Elephant.
Good night, Lion.
Good night, Hyena.
Good night, Giraffe.
Good night, Armadillo.
Good night, dear.
Good night.
Good night.
Good night.
Good night.
Good night.
Good night.
Good night.
Good night, zoo.
Good night, dear.
Good night.
Good night, Gorilla.
Zzzz.

Title: Madeline
Author: Ludwig Bemelmans
In an old house in Paris that was covered with vines lived twelve little girls in two straight lines.
In two straight lines they broke their bread and brushed their teeth and went to bed.
The smiled at the good and frowned at the bad and sometimes they were very sad.
The left the house at half past nine in two straight lines in rain or shine - the smallest one was Madeline.
She was not afraid of mice - she loved winter, snow, and ice.
To the tiger at the zoo Madeline just said, "Pooh-pooh," and nobody knew so well how to frighten Miss Clavel.
In the middle of one night Miss Clavel turned on her light and said, "Something is not right!"
Little Madeline sat in bed, cried and cried; her eyes were red.
And soon after Dr. Cohn came, he rushed out to the phone and he dialed: DANton-tex-six - "Nurse," he said, "it’s an appendix!"
Everybody had to cry - not a single eye was dry.
Madeline was in his arm in a blanket safe and warm.
In a car with a red light they drove into the night.
Madeline woke up two hours later, in a room with flowers.
Madeline soon ate and drank.
On her bed there was a crank, and a crack on the ceiling had the habit of sometimes looking like a rabbit.
Outside were birds, trees, and sky - and so ten days passed quickly by.
one nice morning Miss Clavel said - "Isn’t this a fine - day to visit Madeline."
VISITORS FROM TWO TO FOUR read a sign outside her door.
Tiptoeing with solemn face, with some flowers and a vase, in they walked then said, "Ahhh," when they saw the toys and candy and the dollhouse from Papa.
But the biggest surprise by far - on her stomach was a scar!
"Good-by," they said, "we’ll come again," and the little girls left in the rain.
They went home and broke their bread brushed their teeth and went to bed.
In the middle of the night Miss Clavel turned on the light and said, "Something is not right!"
And afraid of a disaster Miss Clavel ran fast and faster, and she said, "Please children do - tell me what is troubling you?"
And all the litle girls cried, "Boohoo, we want our appendix out, too!"
"Good night, little girls! 
Thank the lord you are well! 
And now go to sleep!" said Miss Clavel.
And she turned out the light - and closed the door - and that’s all there is - there isn’t any more.

Title: Make Way for Ducklings
Author: Robert McCloskey
Mr. and Mrs. Mallard were looking for a place to live.
But every time Mr. Mallard saw what looked like a nice place, Mrs. Mallard said it was no good.
There was sure to be foxes in the woods or turtles in the water, and she was not going to raise a family where there might be foxes or turtles.
So the flew on and on.
When they got to Boston, they felt too tired to fly any further.
There was a nice pond in the Public Garden, with a little island on it.
"The very place to spend the night," quacked Mr. Mallard.
So down they flapped.
Next morning they fished for their breakfast in the mud at the bottom on the pond.
But they didn’t find much.
Just as they were getting ready to start on their way, a strange enormous bird came by.
It was pushing a boat full of people, and there was a man sitting on its back.
"Good morning," quacked Mr. Mallard, being polite.
The big bird was too proud to answer.
But the people on the boat threw peanuts into the water, so the Mallards followed them all round the pond and got another breakfast, better than the first.
"I like this place," said Mrs. Mallard as they climbed out on the bank and waddled along.
"Why don’t we build a nest and raise our ducklings right in this pond?
There are no foxes and no turtles, and the people feed us peanuts.
What could be better?"
"Good," said Mr. Mallard, delighted that at last Mrs. Mallard had found a place that suited her.
But – "Look out!" squawked Mrs. Mallard, all of a dither.
"You’ll get run over!"
And when she got her breath she added: "This is no place for babies, with all those horrid things rushing about.
We’ll have to look somewhere else."
So they flew over Beacon Hill and round the State House, but there was no place there.
They looked in Louisburg Square, but there as no water to swim in.
Then they flew over the Charles River.
"This is better," quacked Mr. Mallard.
"That island looks like a nice quiet place, and it’s only a little way from the Public Garden."
"Yes," said Mrs. Mallard, remembering the peanuts.
"That looks like just the right place to hatch ducklings."
So they chose a cozy spot among the bushes near the water and settled down to build their nest.
And only just in time, for now they were beginning to molt.
All their old wing feathers started to drop out, and they would not be able to fly again until the new ones grew in.
But of course they could swim, and one day they swam over to the park on the river bank, and they met a policeman called Michael.
Michael fed them peanuts, and after that the Mallards called on Michael every day.
After Mrs. Mallard had laid eight eggs in the nest she couldn’t go visit Michael any more, because she had to sit on the eggs and keep them warm.
She moved off the nest only to get a drink of water, or to have her lunch, or to count the eggs and make sure they were all there.
One day the ducklings hatched out.
First came Jack, then Kack, and then Lack, then Mack and Nack and Ouach and Pack and Quack.
Mr. and Mrs. Mallard were bursting with price.
It was a great responsibility taking care of so many ducklings, and it kept them very busy.
One day Mr. Mallard decided he’d like to take a trip to see what the rest of the river was like, further on.
So off he set.
"I’ll meet you in a week, in the Public Garden," he quacked over his shoulder.
"Take care of the ducklings."
"Don’t you worry," said Mrs. Mallard.
"I know all about bringing up children."
And she did.
She taught them how to swim and dive.
She taught them to walk in a line, to come when they were called, and to keep a safe distance from bikes and scooters and other things with wheels.
When at last she felt perfectly satisfied with them, she said one morning: "Come along children. 
Follow me."
Before you could wink and eyelash, Jack, Kack, Mack, Nack, Ouack, Pack and Quack fell into line, just as they had been taught.
Mrs. Mallard led the way into the water and they swam behind her to the opposite bank.
There they waded ashore and waddled along till they came to the highway.
Mrs. Mallard stepped out to cross the road.
"Honk, honk!" went the horns on the speeding cars.
"Qua-a-ack!" went Mrs. Mallard as she tumbled back again.
"Quack! Quack! Quack! Quack!" went Jack, Kack, Mack, Nack, Ouack, Pack and Quack, just as loud as their little quackers could quack.
The cars kept speeding by and honking, and Mrs. Mallard and the ducklings kept right on quack-quack-quacking.
They made such a noise that Michael came running, waving his arms and blowing his whistle.
He planted himself in the center of the road, raised one hand to stop the traffic, and then beckoned with the other, the way policemen do, for Mrs. Mallard to cross over.
As soon as Mrs. Mallard and the ducklings were safe on the other side and on their way down Mount Vernon Street, Michael rushed back to his police booth.
He called Clancy at headquarters and said: "There’s a family of ducks walkin’ down the street!"
Clancy said: "Family of what?"
"Ducks!" yelled Michael.
"Send a police car, quick!"
Meanwhile, Mrs. Mallard had reached the Corner Book Shop and turned into Charles Street, with Jack, Kack, Mack, Nack, Ouack, Pack and Quack all marching in line behind her.
Everyone stared.
An old lady from Beacon Hill said: "Isn’t it amazing!" and a man who swept the streets said: "Well, now, ain’t that nice!" and when Mrs. Mallard heard them she was so proud she tipped her nose in the air and walked along with and extra swing in her waddle.
When they came to the corner of Beacon Street, there was the police car with four policemen that Clancy had sent from headquarters.
The policemen held back the traffic so Mrs. Mallard and the ducklings could march across the street, right on into the Public Garden.
Inside the gate they all turned round to say thank you to the policemen.
The policemen smiled and waved good-by.
When they reached the pond and swam across to the little island, there was Mr. Mallard waiting for them, just as he had promised.
The ducklings liked the new island so much that they decided to live there.  
All day long they follow the swan boats and eat peanuts.
And when night falls they swim to their little island and go to sleep.

Title: No, David!
Author: David Shannon
David’s mom always said. . . No, David!
No, David!
No, David, no!
No! No! No!
Come back here, David!
David!
Be quiet!
Don’t play with your food!
That’s enough, David!
Go to your room!
Settle down!
Stop that this instant!
Put your toys away!
Not in the house, David!
I said no, David!
Davey, come here.
Yes, David. . . I love you!

Title: Own Moon
Author: Jane Yolen
It was late one winter night, long past my bedtime, when Pa and I went owling.
There was no wind.
The trees stood still as giant statues.
And the moon was so bright the sky seemed to shine.
Somewhere behind us a train whistle blew, long and low, like a sad, sad song.
I could hear it through the woolen cap Pa had pulled down over my ears.
A farm dog answered the train, and then a second dog joined in.
They sang out, trains and dogs, for a real long time.
And when their voices faded away it was as quiet as a dream.
We walked on toward to woods, Pa and I.
Our feet crunched over the crisp snow and little gray footprints followed us.
Pa made a long shadow, but mine was short and round.
I had to run after him every now and then to keep up, and my short, round shadow bumped after me.
But I never called out.
If you go owling you have to be quiet, that’s what Pa always says.
I had been waiting to go owling with Pa for a long, long time.
We reached the line of pine trees, black and pointy against the sky, and Pa held up his hand.
I stopped right where I was and waited.
He looked up, as if searching the stars, as if reading a map up there.
The moon made his face into a silver mask.
Then he called: "Whoo-whoo-who-who-who-whoooooooo," the sound of a Great Horned Owl.
"Whoo-whoo-who-who-who-whoooooooo."
Again he called out.
And then again.
After each call he was silent and for a moment we both listened.
But there was no answer.
Pa shrugged and I shrugged.
I was not disappointed.
My brothers all said sometimes there’s an owl and sometimes there isn’t.
We walked on.
I could feel the cold, as if someone’s icy hand was palm-down on my back.
And my nose and the tops of my cheeks felt cold and hot at the same time.
But I never said a word.
If you go owling, you have to be quiet and make your own heat.
We went into the woods.
The shadows were the blackest things I had ever seen.
They stained the white snow.
My mouth felt furry, for the scarf over it was wet and warm.
I didn’t ask what kinds of things hide behind black trees in the middle of the night.
When you go owling you have to be brave.
Then we came to a clearing in the dark woods.
The moon was high above us.
It seemed to fit exactly over the center of the clearing and the snow below it was whiter than the milk in a cereal bowl.
I sighed and Pa held up his hand at the sound.
I put my mittens over the scarf over my mouth and listened hard.
And then Pa called: "Whoo-whoo-who-who-who-whoooooooo. Whoo-whoo-who-who-who-whoooooooo."
I listened and looked so hard my ears hurt and my eyes got cloudy with the cold. 
Pa raised his face to call out again, but before he could open his mouth an echo came threading its way through the trees.
"Whoo-whoo-who-who-who-whoooooooo."
Pa almost smiled.
Then he called back: "Whoo-whoo-who-who-who-whoooooooo," just as if he and the owl were talking about supper or about the woods or the moon or the cold.
I took my mitten off the scarf off my mouth, and I almost smiled, too.
The owl’s call came closer, from high up in the trees on the edge of the meadow.
Nothing in the meadow moved.
All of a sudden an owl shadow, part of the big tree shadow, lifted off and flew right over us.
We watched silently with the heat of our mouths, the heat of all those words we had not spoken.
The shadow hooted again.
Pa turned on his big flashlight and caught the owl just as it was landing on a branch.
For one minute, three minutes, maybe even a hundred minutes, we stared at one another.
Then the owl pumped its great wings and lifted off the branch like a shadow without sound.
It flew back into the forest.
"Time to go home," Pa said to me.
I knew then I could talk, I could even laugh out loud.
But I was a shadow as we walked home.
When you go owling you don’t need words or warm or anything but hope.
That’s what Pa says.
The kind of hope that flies on silent wings under a shining Owl Moon.

Title: Stellaluna
Author: Janell Cannon
In a warm and sultry forest far, far away, there once lived a mother fruit bat and her new baby.
Oh, how Mother Bat loved her soft tiny baby.
"I’ll name you Stellaluna," she crooned.
Each night, Mother Bat would carry Stellaluna clutched to her breast as she flew out to search for food.
One night, as Mother Bat followed the heavy scent of ripe fruit, an owl spied her. 
On silent wings the powerful bird swooped down upon the bats.
Dodging and shrieking, Mother Bat tried to escape, but the owl struck again and again, knocking Stellaluna into the air. 
Her baby wings were as limp and useless as wet paper.
Down, down she went, faster and faster, into the forest below.
The dark leafy tangle of branches caught Stellaluna as she fell. 
One twig was small enough for Stellaluna’s tiny feet. 
Wrapping her wings about her, she clutched the thin branch, trembling with cold and fear.
"Mother," Stellaluna squeaked. 
"Where are you? "
By drybreak, the baby bat could hold on no longer.
Down, down again she dropped.
Flump!
Stellaluna landed headfirst in a soft downy nest, startling the three baby birds who lived there.
Stellaluna quickly clambered from the nest and hung out of sight below it. 
She listened to the babble of the three birds.
"What was that?" cried Flap.
"I don’t know but it’s hanging by its feet," chirped Flitter.
"Shhh! Here comes Mama," hissed Pip.
Many, many times that day Mama Bird flew away, always returning with food for her babies.
Stellaluna was terribly hungry- but not for the crawly things Mama Bird brought.
Finally, though, the little bat could bear it no longer.
She climbed into the nest, closed her eyes, and opened her mouth.
Plop!
In dropped a big green grasshopper!
Stellaluna learned to be like the birds. 
She stayed awake all day and slept at night. 
She ate bugs even though they tasted awful. 
Her bat ways were quickly disappearing.
Except for one thing: Stellaluna still liked to sleep hanging by her feet.
Once, when Mama was away, the curious baby birds decided to try it, too. 
When Mama Bird came home she saw eight tiny feet gripping the edge of the nest.
"Eeeek!" she cried. 
"Get back up here this instant!
You’re going to fall and break your necks!"
The birds clambered back into the nest, but Mama Bird stopped Stellaluna. 
"You are teaching my children to do bad things. 
I will not let you back into this nest unless you promise to obey all the rules of this house."
Stellaluna promised. 
She ate bugs without making faces. 
She slept in the nest at night. 
And she didn’t hang by her feet. 
Stellaluna behaved as a good bird should.
All the babies grew quickly. 
Soon the nest became crowded.
Mama Bird told them it was time to learn to fly. 
One by one, Pip, Flitter, Flap, and Stellaluna jumped from the nest.
Their wings worked!
I’m just like them, thought Stellaluna. 
I can fly, too.
Pip, Flitter, and Flap landed gracefully on a branch.
Stellaluna tried to do the same.
How embarrassing!
I will fly all day, Stellaluna told herself. 
Then no one will see how clumsy I am.
The next day, Pip, Flitter, Flap, and Stellaluna went flying far from home. 
They flew for hours, exercising their new wings.
"The sun is setting," warned Flitter.
"We had better go home or we will get lost in the dark," said Flap.
But Stellaluna had flown far ahead and was nowhere to be seen.
The three anxious birds went home without her.
All alone Stellaluna flew and flew until her wings ached and she dropped into a tree. 
"I promised not to hang by my feet," Stellaluna sighed. 
So she hung by her thumbs and soon fell asleep.
She didn’t hear the soft sound of wings coming near.
"Hey!" a loud voice said. 
"Why are you hanging upside down?"
Stellaluna’s eyes opened wide. 
She saw a most peculiar face. 
"I’m not upside down, you are!" Stellaluna said.
"Ah, but you’re a bat. 
Bats hang by their feet. 
You are hanging by your thumbs, so that makes you upside down!"the creature said. 
"I’m a bat. 
I am hanging by my feet.
That makes me right side up!"
Stellaluna was confused. 
"Mama Bird told me I was upside down. 
She said I was wrong . . ."
"Wrong for a bird, maybe, but not for a bat."
More bats gathered around to see the strange young bat who behaved like a bird. 
Stellaluna told them her story.
"You ate b-bugs?" stuttered one.
"You slept at night?" gasped another.
"How very strange," they all murmured.
"Wait! Wait! Let me look at this child." 
A bat pushed through the crowd. 
"An owl attacked you?" she asked.
Sniffing Stellaluna’s fur, she whispered, "You are Stellaluna.
You are my baby."
"You escaped the owl?" cried Stellaluna. 
"You survived?"
"Yes," said Mother Bat as she wrapped her wings around Stellaluna. "Come with me and I’ll show you where to find the most delicious fruit. 
You’ll  never have to eat another bug as long as you live."
"But it’s nighttime," Stellaluna squeaked. 
"We can’t fly in the dark or we will crash into trees."
"We’re bats," said Mother Bat. 
"We can see in darkness. 
Come with us."
Stellaluna was afraid, but she let go of the tree and dropped into the deep blue sky.
Stellaluna could see. 
She felt as though rays of light shone from her eyes. 
She was able to see everything in her path.
Soon the bats found a mango tree and stellaluna ate as much of the fruit as she could hold.
"I’ll never eat another bug as long as I live," cheered Stellaluna as she stuffed herself full. 
"I must tell Pip, Flitter and Flap!"
The next day Stellaluna went to visit the birds.
"Come with me and meet my bat family," said Stellaluna.
"Okay, let’s go," agreed Pip.
"They hang by their feet and they fly at night and they eat the best food in the world," Stellaluna explained to the birds on the way.
As the birds flew among the bats, Flap said, "I feel upside down here."
So the birds hung by their feet.
"Wait until dark," Stellaluna said excitedly.
"We will fly at night."
When night came Stellaluna flew away. 
Pip, Flitter, and Flap leapt from the tree to follow her.
"I can’t see a thing!" yelled Pip.
"Neither can I," howled Flitter.
"Aaeee!" shrieked Flap.
"They’re going to crash," gasped Stellaluna. 
"I must rescue them!"
Stellaluna swooped about, grabbing her friends in the air. 
She lifted them to a tree, and the birds grasped a branch. 
Stellaluna hung from the limb above them.
"We’re safe," said Stellaluna. 
Then she sighed. "I wish you could see in the dark, too."
"We wish you could land on your feet," Flitter replied.
Pip and Flap nodded.
They perched in silence for a long time.
"How can we be so different and feel so much alike?" mused Flitter.
"And how can we feel so different and be so much alike?" wondered Pip.
"I think this is quite a mystery" Flap chirped.
"I agree," said Stellaluna. "But we’re friends.
And that’s a fact."
BAT NOTES
Of the nearly 4,000 species of mammals on Earth, almost one quarter are bats, the only mammals capable of powered flight.
The scientific name for bats in Chiroptera, "hand-wing," because the skeleton that supports the wing is composed on the animal’s elongated finger bones.
The majority of bats are classified as Microchiroptera, "small hand-wing." 
Nearly 800 varieties fill special niches in every climate around the world except the polar zones.
The lifestyles and food preferences of Microchiroptera vary wildly.
Many eat insects, while others catch fish, amphibians, and reptiles.
Finally, there is the famous vampire, of which there are only three species, ranging from Mexico to Argentina.  
The vampire’s victims are mostly domestic cattle and native mammals and birds.
The other 170 or so species of bats are the fruit bats, otherwise known as Megachiroptera, or "large hand-wing."
As their name implies, they are the largest bats, some types boasting wingspans of six feet.
Fruit bats generally have long muzzles, large eyes, pointy ears, and furry bodies, which is why they are often called flying foxes.
Unlike Microchiroptera, who travel by echolocation, fruit bats depend on their keen vision and sense of smell to navigate.
They live in tropical and subtropical climates that provide year-round supplies of their favorite fruit, flowers, and nectar.
Some fruit bats, as they forage for nectar, are responsible for pollination of many types of night-blooming trees and plants.
Others eat whole fruits, seeds and all, and distribute the seeds over the forest floor in their droppings. 
Regeneration of tropical forests depends greatly on bats.

Title: Sylvester and the Magic Pebble
Author: William Steig
Sylvester Duncan lived with his mother and father at Acorn Road in Oatsdale.
One of his hobbies was collecting pebbles of unusual shape and color.
On a rainy Saturday, during vacation he found a quite extraordinary one. 
It was flaming red, shiny, and perfectly round, like a marble. 
As he was studying this remarkable pebble, he began to shiver, probably from excitement, and the rain felt cold on his back. 
"I wish it would stop raining," he said.
To his great surprise the rain stopped. 
It didn’t stop gradually as rains usually do. 
It CEASED. 
The drops vanished on the way down, the clouds disappeared, everything was dry, and the sun was shining as if rain had never existed.
In all his young life Sylvester had never had a wish gratified so quickly. 
It struck him that magic must be at work, and he guessed that the magic must be in the remarkable-looking red pebble. 
(Where indeed it was.) 
To make a test, he put the pebble on the ground and said, "I wish it would rain again." 
Nothing happened.
But when he said the same thing holding the Pebble in his hoof, the sky turned black, there was lightning and a clap of thunder, and the rain came shooting down.
"What a lucky day this is!" thought Sylvester.
"From now on I can have anything I want.
My father and mother can have anything they want. 
My relatives, my friends, and anybody at all can have everything anybody wants!"
He wished the sunshine back in the sky, and he wished a wart on his left hind fetlock would disappear, and it did, and he started home, eager to amaze his father and mother with his magic pebble.
He could hardly wait to see their faces. 
Maybe they wouldn’t even believe him at first.
As he was crossing strawberry Hill, thinking of some of the many, many things he could wish for, he was startled to see a mean, hungry lion looking right at him from behind some tall grass. 
He was frightened. 
If he hadn’t been so frightened, he could have made the lion disappear, or he could have wished himself safe at home with his father and mother.
He could have wished the lion would turn into a butterfly or a daisy or a gnat. 
He could have wished many things, but he panicked and couldn’t think carefully.
"I wish I were a rock," he said, and he became a rock.
The lion came bounding over, sniffed the rock a hundred times, walked around and around it, and went away confused, perplexed, puzzled, and bewildered. 
"I saw that little donkey as clear as day. 
Maybe I’m going crazy," he muttered.
And there was Sylvester, a rock on Strawberry Hill, with the magic pebble lying right beside him on the ground, and he was unable to pick it up. 
"Oh, how I wish I were myself again," he thought, but nothing happened. 
He had to be touching the pebble to make the magic work, but there was nothing he could do about it.
His thoughts began to race like mad. 
He was scared and worried. 
Being helpless, he felt hopeless. 
He imagined all the possibilities, and eventually he realized that his only chance of becoming himself again was for someone to find the red pebble and to wish that the rock next to it would be a donkey. 
Someone would surely find the red pebble – it was so bright and shiny - but what on earth would make them wish that a rock were a donkey? 
The chance was one in a billion at best.
Sylvester fell asleep.
What else could he do? 
Night came with many stars.
Meanwhile, back at home, Mr. and Mrs. Duncan paced the floor, frantic with worry. 
Sylvester had never come home later than dinner time. 
Where could he be? 
They stayed up all night wondering what had happened, expecting that Sylvester would surely turn up by morning. 
But he didn’t, of course.
Mrs. Duncan cried a lot and Mr. Duncan did his best to soothe her. 
Both longed to have their dear son with them.
"I will never scold Sylvester again as long as I live," said Mrs. Duncan, "no matter what he does."
At dawn, they went about inquiring of all the neighbors.
They talked to all the children - the puppies, the kittens, the colts, the piglets. 
No one had seen Sylvester since the day before yesterday.
They went to the police. 
The police could not find their child.
All the dogs in Oatsdale went searching for him. 
They sniffed behind every rock and tree and blade of grass, into every nook and gully of the neighborhood and beyond, but found not a scent of him. 
They sniffed the rock on strawberry Hill, but it smelled like a rock. 
It didn’t smell like Sylvester.
After a month of searching the same places over and over again, and inquiring of the same animals over and over again, Mr. and Mrs. Duncan no longer knew what to do.
They concluded that something dreadful must have happened and that they would probably never see their son again. 
(Though all the time he was less than a mile away.)
They tried their best to be happy, to go about their usual ways. 
But their usual ways included Sylvester and they were always reminded of him. 
They were miserable. 
Life had no meaning for them any more.
Night followed day and day followed night over and over again. 
Sylvester on the hill woke up less and less often.
When he was awake, he was only hopeless and unhappy.
He felt he would be a rock forever and he tried to get used to it. 
He went into an endless sleep. 
The days grew colder.
Fall came with the leaves changing color. 
Then the leaves fell and the grass bent to the ground.
Then it was winter. 
The winds blew, this way and that.
It snowed. 
Mostly, the animals stayed indoors, living on the food they had stored up.
One day a wolf sat on the rock that was Sylvester and howled and howled because he was hungry.
Then the snows melted. 
The earth warmed up in the spring sun and things budded.
Leaves were on the trees again.
Flowers showed their young faces.
One day in May, Mr. Duncan insisted that his wife go with him on a picnic. 
"Let’s cheer up," he said. 
"Let us try to live again and be happy even though Sylvester, our angel, is no longer with us." 
They went to Strawberry Hill.
Mrs. Duncan sat down on the rock. 
The warmth of his own mother sitting on him woke Sylvester up from his deep winter sleep. 
How he wanted to shout, "Mother! Father!
It’s me, Sylvester, I’m right here!" 
But he couldn’t talk. 
He had no voice. 
He was stone-dumb.
Mr. Duncan walked aimlessly about while Mrs. Duncan set out the picnic food on the rock - alfalfa sandwiches, pickled oats, sassafras salad, timothy compote. 
Suddenly Mr. Duncan saw the red pebble. 
"What a fantastic pebble!" he exclaimed. 
"Sylvester would have loved it for his collection."
He put the pebble on the rock.
They sat down to eat. 
Sylvester was now as wide awake as a donkey that was a rock could possibly be. 
Mrs. Duncan felt some mysterious excitement. 
"You know, Father," she said suddenly, "I have the strangest feeling that our dear Sylvester is still alive and not far away."
"I am, I am!" Sylvester wanted to shout, but he couldn’t.
If only he had realized that the pebble resting on his back was the magic pebble!
"Oh, how I wish he were here with us on this lovely May day," said Mrs. Duncan. 
Mr. Duncan looked sadly at the ground. 
"Don’t you wish it too, Father?" she said. 
He looked at her as if to say, "How can you ask such a question?"
Mr. and Mrs. Duncan looked at each other with great sorrow.
"I wish I were myself again, I wish I were my real self again!" thought Sylvester.
And in less than an instant, he was!
You can imagine the scene that followed - the embraces, the kisses, the questions, the answers, the loving looks, and the fond exclamations!
When they had eventually calmed down a bit, and had gotten home, Mr. Duncan put the magic pebble in an iron safe.
Some day they might want to use it, but really, for now, what more could they wish for? 
They all had all that they wanted.
The End

Title: The Giving Tree
Author: Shel Silverstein
Once there was a tree . . . and she loved a little boy.
And every day the boy would come and he would gather her leaves and make them into crowns and play king of the forest.
He would climb up her trunk and swing from her branches and eat apples.
And they would play hide-and-go-seek.
And when he was tired, he would sleep in her shade.
And the boy loved the tree . . . very much.
And the tree was happy.
But time went by.
And the boy grew older.
And the tree was often alone.
Then one day the boy came to the tree and the tree said, "Come, Boy, come and climb up my trunk and swing from my branches and eat apples and play in my shade and be happy."
"I am too big to climb and play," said the boy.
"I want to buy things and have fun.
I want some money.
Can you give me some money?"
"I’m sorry," said the tree, "but I have no money.
I have only leaves and apples.
Take my apples, Boy, and sell them in the city. 
Then you will have money and you will be happy."
And so the boy climbed up the tree and gathered her apples and carried them away.
And the tree was happy.
But the boy stayed away for a long time. . . and the tree was sad.
And then one day the boy came back and the tree shook with joy and she said, "Come, Boy, climb up my trunk and swing from my branches and be happy."
"I am too busy to climb trees," said the boy.
"I want a house to keep me warm," he said.
"I want a wife and I want children, and so I need a house.
Can you give me a house?"
"I have no house," said the tree.
"The forest is my house, but you may cut off my branches and build a house.
Then you will be happy."
And so the boy cut off her branches and carried them away to build his house.
And the tree was happy.
But the boy stayed away for a long time.
And when he came back, the tree was so happy she could hardly speak.
"Come, Boy," she whispered, "come and play."
"I am too old and sad to play," said the boy.
"I want a boat that will take me far away from here.
Can you give me a boat?"
"Cut down my trunk and make a boat," said the tree.
"Then you can sail away . . . and be happy."
And so the boy cut down her trunk and made a boat and sailed away.
And the tree was happy . . . but not really.
And after a long time the boy came back again.
"I am sorry, Boy," said the tree, "but I have nothing left to give you-
My apples are gone."
"My teeth are too weak for apples," said the boy.
"My branches are gone," said the tree. 
"You cannot swing on them-"
"I am too old to swing on branches," said the boy.
"My trunk is gone," said the tree.
"You cannot climb-"
"I am too tired to climb," said the boy.
"I am sorry," sighed the tree.
"I wish that I could give you something . . . but I have nothing left. 
I am just an old stump. 
I am sorry- . . ."
"I don’t need very much now," said the boy, "just a quiet place to sit and rest.
I am very tired."
"Well," said the tree, straightening herself up as much as she could, "well, an old stump is good for sitting and resting.
Come, Boy, sit down.
Sit down and rest."
And the boy did.
And the tree was happy.
The End

Title: The Polar Express
Author: Chris Van Allsburg
On Christmas eve, many years ago, I lay quietly in my bed.
I did not rustle the sheets.  
I breathed slowly and silently.
I was listening for a sound - a sound a friend had told me I’d never hear - the ringing bells of Santa’s sleigh.
"There is no Santa," my friend has insisted but I knew he was wrong.
Late that night I did hear sounds, though not of ringing bells.
From outside came the sounds of hissing steam and squeaking metal.
I looked through my window and saw a train standing perfectly still in front of my house.
It was wrapped in an apron of  steam. 
Snowflakes fell lightly around it. 
A conductor  stood at the open door of  one of the  cars. 
He took a large pocket watch from  his vest, then looked up at my window.
I put on my slippers and robe.
I tiptoed downstairs and out the door.
 "All aboard," the conductor cried out. 
I ran up to him.
"Well," he said, "are you coming?"
"Where?" I asked.
"Why, to the North Pole of course," was his answer. 
"This is the Polar Express." 
I took his outstretched hand and he pulled me aboard.
The train was filled with other children, all in their pajamas and nightgowns. 
We sang Christmas carols and ate candies with nougat  centers as white as snow. 
We drank hot cocoa as thick and rich as melted chocolate  bars. 
Outside the lights of towns and villages flickered in the distance as the Polar Express raced northward.
Soon there were no more lights to be seen. 
We traveled through cold, dark forests, where lean wolves roamed and white-tailed rabbits hid from our train as it thundered through the quiet wilderness.
We climbed mountains so high it seemed as if we would  scrape the moon. 
But the Polar Express never slowed down.
Faster and faster we ran along, rolling over peaks and through valleys like a  car on a roller coaster.
The mountains turned into hills, the hills to snow-covered plains.’
We crossed a barren desert of ice - the Great Polar Ice Cap. 
Lights appeared in the distance. 
They looked like the lights of a strange ocean liner sailing on a frozen sea.
’"There," said the conductor, "is the North Pole."
The North Pole. 
It was a huge city standing alone at the top of the world, filled with factories where  every Christmas toy  was made.
At first we saw no elves.
"They are gathering at the center of the city," the conductor told us. 
"That is where Santa will give the first gift of Christmas."
"Who receives the first gift?" we all asked.
The conductor answered.
"He will choose one of you."
"Look," shouted one of the children, "the elves." 
Outside we saw hundreds of elves. 
As our train drew closer to the center of the North Pole, we slowed to a crawl, so crowded were the streets with Santa’s helpers. 
When the Polar Express could go no farther, we stopped and the conductor led us outside.
We pressed through the crowd to the edge of a large, open circle. 
In front of us stood Santa’s sleigh. 
The reindeer were excited. 
They pranced and paced, ringing the silver sleigh bells that hung from their harnesses. 
It was a magical sound, like nothing I’d ever heard. 
Across the circle, the elves moved apart and Santa Claus appeared. 
The elves cheered wildly.
He marched over to us and, pointing to me, said, "Let’s have this fellow here." 
He jumped into his sleigh. 
The conductor handed me up. 
I sat on Santa’s knee and he asked, "Now, what would you like for Christmas?"
I knew that I could have any gift I could imagine. 
But the thing I wanted most for Christmas was not inside Santa’s giant bag. 
What I wanted more than anything was one silver bell from Santa’s sleigh. 
When I asked, Santa smiled. 
Then he gave me a hug and told an elf to cut a bell from a reindeer’s harness. 
The elf tossed it up to Santa. 
He stood, holding the bell high above him, and called out, "The first gift of Christmas!"
A clock struck midnight as the elves roared their approval.
Santa handed the bell to me, and I put it in my bathrobe pocket. 
The conductor helped me down from the sleigh.
 Santa shouted out the reindeer’s names and cracked his whip.
His team charged forward and climbed into the air.  
Santa circled once above us, then disappeared in the cold, dark polar sky.
As soon as we were back inside the Polar Express, the other children asked to see the bell. 
I reached into my pocket but the only thing I felt was a hole. 
I had lost the silver bell from Santa Claus’s sleigh.
"Let’s hurry outside and look for it," one of the children said.
But the train gave a sudden lurch and started moving.
We were on our way home.
It broke my heart to lose the bell. 
When the train reached my house, I sadly left the other children. 
I stood at my doorway and waved good-bye.
The conductor said something from the moving train, but I couldn’t hear him. 
"What?" I yelled out.
He cupped his hands around his mouth. 
"MERRY CHRISTMAS," he shouted.
The Polar Express let out a loud blast from its whistle and sped away.
On Christmas morning my little sister Sarah and I opened our  presents. 
When it looked as if everything had been unwrapped, Sarah found one last small box behind the tree.
It had my name on it. 
Inside was the silver bell! 
There was a note: "Found this on the seat of my sleigh. 
Fix that hole in your pocket." Signed, "Mr. C."
I shook the bell.
It made the most beautiful sound my sister and I had ever heard.
But my mother said, "Oh, that’s too bad."
"Yes," said my father, "it’s broken."
When I’d shaken the bell, my parents had not heard a sound.
At one time most of my friends could hear the bell, but as  years passed, it fell silent for all of them. 
Even Sarah found one Christmas that she could no longer hear its sweet sound. 
Though I’ve grown old, the bell still rings for me as it does for all who truly believe.

Title: Dear Zoo
Author: Rod Campbell
I wrote to the zoo to send me a pet.
They sent me an . . .
He was too big!
I sent him back.
So they sent me a . . .
He was too tall!
I sent him back.
So they sent me a . . .
He was too fierce!
I sent him back.
So they sent me a . . .
He was too grumpy!
I sent him back.
So they sent me a . . .
He was too scary!
I sent him back.
So they sent me a . . .
He was too naughty!
I sent him back.
So they sent me a . . .
He was too jumpy!
I sent him back.
So they thought very hard, and sent me a . . .
He was perfect!
I kept him.

Title: The Little House
Author: Virginia Lee Burton
Once upon a time there was a Little House way out in the country.
She was a pretty Little House and she was strong and well built.
The man who built her so well said, "This Little House shall never be sold for gold or silver and she will live to see our great-great-grandchildren’s great-great-grandchildren living in her."
The Little House was very happy as she sat on the hill and watched the countryside around her.
She watched the sun rise in the morning and she watched the sun set in the evening.
Day followed day, each one a little different form the one before . . . but the Little House stayed just the same.
In the nights she watched the moon grow from a thin new moon to a full moon, then back again to a thin old moon; and when there was no moon she watched the stars.
Way off in the distance she could see the lights of the city.
The Little House was curious about the city and wondered what it would be like to live there.
Time passed quickly for the Little House as she watched the countryside slowly change with the seasons.
In the Spring, when the days grew longer and the sun warmer, she waited for the first robin to return from the South.
She watched the grass turn green.
She watched the buds on the trees swell and the apple trees burst into blossom.
She watched the children playing in the brook.
In the long Summer days she sat in the sun and watched the trees cover themselves with leaves and the white daisies cover the hill.  
She watched the gardens grow, and she watched the apples turn red and ripen.
She watched the children swimming in the pool.
In the Fall, when the days grew shorter and the nights colder, she watched the first frost turn the leaves to bright yellow and orange and red.
She watched the harvest gathered and the apples picked.
She watched the children going back to school.
In the Winter, when the nights were long and the days short, and the countryside covered with snow, she watched the children coasting and skating.
Year followed year.
The apple trees grew old and new ones were planted.
The children grew up and went away to the city . . . and now at night the lights of the city seemed brighter and closer.
One day the Little House was surprised to see a horseless carriage coming down the winding country road.
Pretty soon there were more of them on the road and fewer carriages pulled by horses.
Pretty soon along came some surveyors and surveyed a line in front of the Little House.
Pretty soon along came a steam shovel and dug a road through the hill covered with daisies.
Then some trucks came and dumped big stones on the road, then some trucks with little stones, then some trucks with tar and sand, and finally a steam roller came and rolled it all smooth, and the road was done.
Now the Little House watched the trucks and automobiles going back and forth to the city.
Gasoline stations . . . roadside stands . . . and small houses followed the new road.
Everyone and everything moved much faster now than before.
More roads were made, and the countryside was divided into lots.
More houses and bigger houses . . . apartment houses and tenement houses . . . schools . . . stores . . . and garages spread over the land and crowded around the Little House.
No one wanted to live in her and take care of her any more.
She couldn’t be sold for gold or silver, so she just stayed there and watched.
Now it was not so quiet and peaceful at night.
Now the lights of the city were bright and very close, and the street lights shone all night.
"This must be living in the city," thought the Little House, and didn’t know whether she liked it or not.
She missed the field of daisies and the apple trees dancing in the moonlight.
Pretty soon there were trolley cars going back and forth in front of the Little House.
They went back and forth all day and part of the night.
Everyone seemed to be very busy and everyone seemed to be in a hurry.
Pretty soon there was an elevated train going back and forth above the Little House.
The air was filled with dust and smoke, and the noise was so loud that it shook the Little House.
Now she couldn’t tell when Spring came, or Summer or Fall, or Winter.
It al seemed about the same.
Pretty soon there was a subway going back and forth underneath the Little House.
She couldn’t see it, but she could feel and hear it.
People were moving faster and faster.
No one noticed the Little House any more.
They hurried by without a glance.
Pretty soon they tore down the apartment houses and tenement houses around the Little House and started digging big cellars . . . one on each side.
The steam shovels dug down three stories on one side and four stories on the other side.
Pretty soon they started building up . . .
They built up twenty-five stories on one side and thirty-five stories on the other.
Now the Little House only saw the sun at noon, and didn’t see the moon or starts at night at all because the lights of the city were too bright.
She didn’t like living in the city.
At night she used to dream of the country and the field of daisies and the apple trees dancing in the moonlight.
The Little House was very sad and lonely.
Her paint was cracked and dirty . . .
Her windows were broken and her shutters hung crookedly.
She looked shabby . . . though she was just as good a house as ever underneath.
Then one fine morning in Spring along came the great-great-granddaughter of the man who built the Little House so well.
She saw the shabby Little House, but she didn’t hurry by.
There was something about the Little House that made her stop and look again.
She said to her husband, "That Little House looks just like the Little House my grandmother lived in when she was a little girl, only that Little House was way out in the country on a hill covered with daisies and apple trees growing around."
The found out it was the very same house, so the went to the Movers to see if the Little House could be moved.
The Movers looked the Little House all over and said, "Sure, this house is as good as ever.  
She’s build so well we could move her anywhere."
So they jacked up the Little House and put her on wheels.
Traffic was held up for hours as they slowly moved her out of the city.
At first the Little House was frightened, but after she got used to it she rather liked it.
They rolled along the big road, and they rolled along the little roads, until they were way out in the country.
When the Little House saw the green grass and heard the birds singing, she didn’t feel sad any more.
They went along and along, but they couldn’t seem to find just the right place.
They tried the Little House here, and they tried her there.
Finally they saw a little hill in the middle of the field . . . and apple trees growing around.
"There," said the great-great-granddaughter, "that’s just the place."
"Yes, it is," said the Little House to herself.
A cellar was dug on top of the hill and slowly they moved the house from the road to the hill.
The windows and shutters were fixed and once again they painted her a lovely shade of pink.
As the Little House settled down on her new foundation, she smiled happily.
Once again she could watch the sun and moon and stars.
Once again she could watch Spring and Summer and Fall and Winter come and go.
Once again she was lived in and taken care of.
Never again would she be curious about the city . . .
Never again would she want to live there . . .
The stars twinkled above her . . .
A new moon was coming up . . .
It was Spring . . . and all was peaceful in the country.

Title: The Lorax
Author: Dr. Seuss
At the far end of town where Grickle-grass grows and the wind smells slow-and-sour when it blows and no birds ever sing expecting old crows . . . is the street of the Lifted Lorax.
And deep in the Grickle-grass, some people say, if you look deep enough you can still see, today, where the Lorax once stood just as long as it could before somebody lifted the Lorax away.
What was the Lorax?
And why was it there?
And why was it lifted and taken somewhere from the far end of town where the Grickle-grass grows?
The old Once-ler still lives here.
Ask him.
He knows.
You won’t see the Once-ler.
Don’t knock at his door.
He stays in his Lerkim on top of his store.
He lurks in his Lerkim, cold under the roof, where he makes his own clothes out of miff-muffered moof.
And on special dank midnights in August, he peeks out of the shutters and sometimes he speaks and tells how the Lorax was lifted away.
He’ll tell you, perhaps . . . if you’re willing to pay.
On the end of a rope he lets down a tin pail and you have to toss in fifteen cents and a nail and the shell of a great-great-great-grandfather snail.
Then he pulls up the pail, makes a most careful count to see if you’ve paid him the proper amount.
Then he hides what you paid him away in his Snuvv, his secret strange hole in his gruvvulous glove.
Then he grunts, "I will call you by Whisper-ma-Phone, for the secrets I tell are for your ears alone."
Slupp!
Down slupps the Whisper-ma-Phone to your ear and the old Once-ler’s whispers are not very clear, since they have to come down through a snergelly hose, and he sounds as if he had smallish bees up his nose.
"Now I’ll tell you," he says, with his teeth sounding gray, "how the Lorax got lifted and taken away . . . 
It all started way back . . . such a long, long time back . . . 
What back in the days when the grass was still green and the pond was still wet and the clouds were still clean, and the song of the Swomee-Swans rang out in space . . . one morning, I came to this glorious place.
And I first saw the trees!
The Truffula Trees!
The bright-colored tufts of the Truffula Trees!
Mile after mile in the fresh morning breeze.
And under the trees, I saw Brown Bar-ba-loots frisking about in their Bar-ba-loot suits as they played in the shade and ate Truffula Fruits.
From the rippulous pond came the comfortable sound of the Humming-Fish humming while splashing around.
But those trees!
Those trees!
Those Truffula Trees!
All my life I’d been searching for trees such as these.
The touch of their tufts was much softer than silk.
And they had the sweet smell of fresh butterfly milk.
I felt a great leaping of joy in my heart.
I knew just what I’d do!
I unloaded my cart.
In no time at all, I had built a small shop.
Then I chopped down a Truffula Tree with one chop.
And with great skillful skill and with great speedy speed, I took the soft tuft.
And I knitted a Thneed!
The instant I’d finished, I heard a ga-Zump!
I looked.
I saw something pop out of the stump of the tree I’d chopped down.
It was sort of a man.
Describe him? . . .
That’s hard.
I don’t know if I can.
He was shortish.
And oddish.
And brownish.
And mossy.
And he spoke with a voice that was sharpish and bossy.
"Mister!" he said with a sawdusty sneeze, "I am the Lorax."
I speak for the trees.
I speak for the trees, for the trees have no tongues.
And I’m asking you, sir, at the top of my lungs" – he was very upset as he shouted and puffed – "What’s that thing you’ve made out of my Turffula tuft?"
"Look, Lorax," I said.
"There’s no cause for alarm.
I chopped just one tree.
I am doing no harm.
I’m being quite useful.
This thing is a Thneed.
A Thneed’s a Fine-Something-That-All-People-Need!
It’s a shirt.
It’s a sock.
It’s a glove.
It’s a hat.
But it has other uses.
Yes, far beyond that.
You can use it for carpets.
For pillows!
For sheets!
Or curtains!
Or covers for bicycle seats!"
The Lorax said, "Sir! You are crazy with greed.
There is no one on earth who would buy that fool Thneed!"
But the very next minute I proved he was wrong.
For, just at the minute, a chap came along, and he thought that the Thneed I had knitted was great.
He happily bought it for three ninety-eight.
I laughed at the Lorax, "You poor stupid guy!
You never can tell what some people will buy."
"I repeat," cried the Lorax, "I speak for the trees!"
"I’m busy," I told him.
"Shut up, if you please."
I rushed ’cross the room, and in no time at all, built a radio-phone. 
I put in a quick call.
I called all my brothers and uncles and aunts and I said, "Listen here! Here’s a wonderful chance for the whole Once-ler Family to get mighty rich!
Get over here fast! 
Take the road to North Nitch.
Turn left at Weehawken. 
Sharp right at South Stitch."
And, in no time at all, in the factory I built, the whole Once-ler Family was working full tilt.
We were all knitting Thneeds just as busy as bees, to the sound of the chopping of Truffula Trees.
Then . . . 
Oh!
Baby!
Oh!
How my business did grow!
Now, chopping one tree at a time was too slow.
So I quickly invented my Super-Axe-Hacker which whacked off four Truffula Trees at one smacker.
We were making Thneeds four times as fast as before!
And that Lorax? . . . 
He didn’t show up any more.
But the next week he knocked on my new office door.
He snapped, "I’m the Lorax who speaks for the trees which you seem to be chopping as fast as you please.
But I’m also in charge of the Brown Bar-ba-loots who played in the shade in their Bar-ba-loot suits and happily lived, eating Truffula Fruits.
"Now . . . thanks to your hacking my trees to the ground, there’s not enough Truffula Fruit to go ’round.
And my poor Bar-ba-loots are all getting the crummies because they have gas, and no food, in their tummies!
"They loved living here.
But I can’t let them stay.
They’ll have to find food.
And I hope that they may.
Good luck, boys," he cried.
And he sent them away.
I, the Once-ler, felt sad as I watched them all go.
But . . . business is business!
And businesses must grow regardless of crummies in tummies, you know.
I meant no harm.
I most truly did not.
But I had to grow bigger.
So bigger I got.
I biggered by factory.
I biggered my roads.
I biggered my wagons.
I biggered the loads of the Thneeds I shipped out.
I was shipping them forth to the South!
To the East!
To the West!
To the North!
I went right on biggering . . . selling more Thneeds.
And I biggered my money, which everyone needs.
Then again he came back!
I was fixing some pipes with that old-nuisance Lorax came back with more gripes.
"I am the Lorax," he coughed and he whiffed.
He sneezed and he snuffled.
He snarggled.
He sniffed.
"Once-ler!" he cried with a cruffulous croak.
"Once-ler!
You’re making such smogulous smoke!
My poor Swomee-Swans . . . why, they can’t sing a note!
No on can sign who has smog in his throat.
"And so," said the Lorax, "- please pardon my cough – they cannot live here.
So I’m sending them off.
"Where will they go? . . .
I don’t hopefully know.
They may have to fly for a month . . . or a year . . .
To escape from the smog you’ve smogged-up around here.
"What’s more," snapped the Lorax. 
(His dander was up.)
"Let me say a few words about Gluppity-Glupp.
Your machinery chugs on, day and night without stop making Gluppity-Glupp. 
Also Schloppity-Schlopp.
And what do you do with this leftover goo? . . . 
I’ll show you. 
You dirty old Once-ler man, you!
"You’re glumping the pond where the Humming-Fish hummed!
No more can they hum, for their gills are all gummed.
So I’m sending them off.
Oh, their future is dreary.
They’ll walk on their fins and get woefully weary in search of some water that isn’t so smeary."
And then I got mad.
I got terribly mad.
I yelled at the Lorax, "Now listen here, Dad!
All you do is yap-yap and say, ’Bad! Bad! Bad! Bad!’
Well, I have my rights, sir, and I’m telling you I intend to go on doing just what I do!
And, for your information, you Lorax, I’m figgering on biggering and biggering and biggering and biggering, turning more Truffula Trees into Thneeds which everyone, everyone, everyone needs!"
And at that very moment, we heard a loud whack!
From outside in the fields came a sickening smack of an axe on a tree. 
Then we heard the tree fall.
The very last Truffula Tree of them all!
No more trees.
No more Thneeds.
No more work to be done.
So, in no time, my uncles and aunts, every one, all waved me good-bye.
They jumped into my cars and drove away under the smoke-smuggered stars.
Now all that was left ‘neath the bad-smelling sky was my big empty factory . . . the Lorax . . . and I.
The Lorax said nothing.
Just gave me a glance . . . just gave me a sad, sad backward glance . . . as he lifted himself by the seat of his pants.
And I’ll never forget the grim look on his face when he heisted himself and took leave of this place, through a hole in the smog, without leaving a trace.
And all the Lorax left here in this mess was a small pile of rocks, with one word . . . "unless."
Whatever that meant, well, I just couldn’t guess.
That was long, long, ago.
But each day since that day I’ve sat here and worried and worried away.
Through the years, while my buildings have fallen apart, I’ve worried about it with all of my heart.
"But now," says the Once-ler, "Now that you’re here, the word of the Lorax seems perfectly clear.
Unless someone like you cares a while awful lot, nothing is going to get better.
It’s not.
"So . . .
Catch!" calls the Once-ler.
He lets something fall.
"It’s a Truffula Seed.
It’s the last one of all!
You’re in charge of the last of the Truffula Seeds.
And Truffula Trees are what everyone needs.
Plant a new Truffula.
Treat it with care.
Give it clean water.
And feed it fresh air.
Grow a forest.
Protect it from axes that hack.
Then the Lorax and all of his friends may come back."

Title: The Runaway Bunny
Author: Margaret Wise Brown
Once there was a little bunny who wanted to run away.
So he said to his mother, "I am running away."
"If you run away" said, his mother, "I will run after you.
For you are my little bunny."
"If you run after me," said the little bunny, "I will become a fish in a trout stream and I will swim away from you."
"If you become a fish in a trout stream," said his mother,
"I will become a fisherman and I will fish for you."
"If you become a fisherman," said the little bunny, "I will become a rock on the mountain, high above you."
"If you become a rock on the mountain high above me, said his mother, "I will be a mountain climber, and I will climb to where you are."
"If you become a mountain climber," said the little bunny, "I will be a crocus in a hidden garden."
"If you become a crocus in a hidden garden," said his mother, "I will be a gardener. 
And I will find you."
"If you are a gardener and find me," said the little bunny, "I will be a bird and fly away from you."
"If you become a bird and fly away from me," said his mother, "I will be a tree that you come home to."
"If you become a tree," said the little bunny, "I will become a little sailboat, and I will sail away from you."
"If you become a sailboat and sail away from me," said his mother, "I will become the wind and blow you where I want you to go."
"If you become the wind and blow me," said the little bunny, "I will join a circus and fly away on a flying trapeze."
"If you go flying on a flying trapeze," said his mother, "I will be a tightrope walker, and I will walk across the air to you."
"If you become a tightrope walker and walk across the air," said the bunny, "I will become a little boy and run into a house."
"If you become a little boy and run into a house," said the mother bunny, "I will become your mother and catch you in my arms and hug you."
"Shucks," said the bunny, "I might just as well stay where I am and be your little bunny."
And so he did.
"Have a carrot," said the mother bunny.

Title: Alexander and the Terrible, Horrible, No Good, Very Bad Day
Author: Judith Viorst
I went to sleep with gum in my mouth and now there’s gum in my hair and when I got out of bed this morning I tripped on the skateboard and by mistake I dropped my sweater in the sink while the water was running and I could tell it was going to be a terrible, horrible, no good, very bad day.
At breakfast Anthony found a corvette Sting Ray car kit in his breakfast cereal box and Nick found a junior undercover Agent code ring in his breakfast cereal box but in my breakfast cereal box all I found was breakfast cereal.
I think I’ll move to Australia.
In the car pool Mrs. Gibson let Becky have a sear by the window. 
Audrey and Elliott got seats by the window too. 
I said I was being scrunched. 
I said I was being smushed.
I said, if I don’t get a seat by the window I am going to be carsick. 
No one even answered.
I could tell it was going to be a terrible, horrible, no good, very bad day. 
At school Mrs. Dickens liked Paul’s picture of the sailboat better than my picture of the invisible castle.
At singing time she said I sang too loud. 
At counting time she said I left out sixteen. 
Who needs sixteen?
I could tell it was going to be a terrible, horrible, no good, very bad day.
I could tell because Paul said I wasn’t his best friend anymore.
He said that Philip Parker was his best friend and that Albert Moyo was his next best friend and that I was only his third best friend.
I hope you sit on a tack, I said to Paul. 
I hope the next time you get a double decker strawberry ice-cream cone the ice cream part falls off the cone part and lands in Australia.
There were two cupcakes in Philip Parker’s lunch bag and Albert got a Hershey bar with almonds and Paul’s mother gave him a piece of jelly roll that had little coconut sprinkles on the top. 
Guess whose mother forgot to put in dessert?
It was a terrible, horrible, no good, very bad day. 
That’s what it was, because after school my mom took us all to the dentist and Dr. Fields found a cavity just in me.
Come back next week and I’ll fix it, said Dr. Fields.
Next week, I said, I’m going to Australia. 
On the way downstairs the elevator door closed on my foot and while we were waiting for my mom to go get the car Anthony made me fall where it was muddy and then when I started crying because of the mud Nick said I was a crybaby and while I was punching Nick for saying crybaby my mom came back with the car and scolded me for being muddy and fighting. 
I am having a terrible, horrible, no good, very bad day, I told everybody.
No one even answered.
So then we went to the shoe store to buy some sneakers.
Anthony chose white ones with blue stripes. 
Nick chose red ones with white stripes. 
I chose blue ones with red stripes but then the shoe man said, we’re all sold out. 
They made me buy plain old white ones, but they can’t make me wear them.
When we picked up my dad at his office he said I couldn’t play with his copying machine, but I forgot. 
He also said to watch out for the books on his desk, and I was careful as could be except for my elbow. 
He also said don’t fool around with his phone, but I think I called Australia. 
My dad said please don’t pick him up anymore.
It was a terrible, horrible, no good, very bad day.
There were lima beans for dinner and I hate limas.
There was kissing on TV and I hate kissing.
My bath was too hot, I got soap in my eyes, my marble went down the drain, and I had to wear my railroad-train pajamas.
I hate my railroad-train pajamas.
When I went to bed Nick took back the pillow he said I could keep and the Mickey Mouse night light burned out and I bit my tongue.
The cat wants to sleep with Anthony, not me.
It has been a terrible, horrible, no good, very bad day.
My mom says some days are like that.
Even in Australia

Title: A Bad Case of Stripes
Author: David Shannon
Camilla Cream loved lima beans.
But she never ate them.
All of her friends hated lima beans, and she wanted to fit in.
Camilla was always worried about what other people thought of her.
Today she was fretting even more than usual.
It was the first day of school, and she couldn’t decide what to wear.
There were so many people to impress!
She tried on forty-two outfits, but none seemed quite right.
She put on a pretty red dress and looked in the mirror.
Then she screamed.
Her mother ran into the room, and she screamed, too. 
"Oh my heavens!" she cried. 
"You’re completely covered with stripes!"
This was certainly true. 
Camilla was striped from head to toe.
She looked like a rainbow.
Mrs. Cream felt Camilla’s forehead. 
"Do you feel all right?" she asked.
"I feel fine," Camilla answered, "but just look at me!"
"You get back in bed this instant," her mother ordered. 
"You’re not going to school today."
Camilla was relieved. 
She didn’t want to miss the first day of school, but she was afraid of what the other kids would say. 
And she had no idea what to wear with those crazy stripes.
That afternoon, Dr. Bumble came to examine Camilla. 
"Most extraordinary!" he exclaimed. 
"l’ve never seen anything like it. 
Are you having any coughing, sneezing, runny nose, aches, pains, chills, hot flashes, dizziness, drowsiness, shortness of breath, or uncontrollable twitching?"
"No," Camilla told him. 
"I feel fine."
"Well then," Dr. Bumble said, turning to Mrs. Cream, "l don’t see any reason why she shouldn’t go to school tomorrow. 
Here’s some ointment that should help clear up those stripes in a few days.
If it doesn’t, you know where to reach me." 
And off he went.
The next day was a disaster. 
Everyone at school laughed at Camilla.
They called her "Camilla Crayon" and "Night of the Living Lollipop."
She tried her best to act as if everything were normal, but when the class said the Pledge of Allegiance, her stripes turned red, white, and blue, and she broke out in stars!
The other kids thought this was great. 
One yelled out, "Let’s see some purple polka dots!" 
Sure enough, Camilla turned all purple polka-dotty. 
Someone else shouted, "Checkerboard!" and a pattern of squares covered her skin. 
Soon everyone was calling out different shapes and colors, and poor Camilla was changing faster than you can change channels on a T.V.
That night, Mr. Harms, the school principal, called.
 "l’m sorry, Mrs. Cream," he said. 
"I’m going to have to ask you to keep Camilla home from school. 
She’s just too much of a distraction, and I’ve been getting calls from the other parents. 
They’re afraid those stripes may be contagious."
Camilla was so embarrassed. 
She couldn’t believe that two days ago everyone liked her. 
Now, nobody wanted to be in the same room with her.
Her father tried to make her feel better. 
"Is there anything I can get you, sweetheart?" he asked.
"No, thank you," sighed Camilla. 
What she really wanted was a nice plate of lima beans, but she had been laughed at enough for one day.
"Hmm, well, yes, I see," Dr. Bumble mumbled when Mr. Cream phoned the next day. 
"I think I’d better bring in the Specialists. 
We’ll be right over."
About an hour later, Dr. Bumble arrived with four people in long white coats. 
He introduced them to the Creams. 
"This is Dr. Grop, Dr. Sponge, Dr. Cricket, and Dr. Young."
Then the Specialists went to work on Camilla. 
They squeezed and jabbed, tapped and tested. 
It was very uncomfortable.
"Well, it’s not the mumps," concluded Dr. Grop.
"Or the measles," said Dr. Sponge.
"Definitely not chicken pox," put in Dr. Cricket.
"Or sunburn," said Dr. Young.
"Try these," said the Specialists.
They each handed her a bottle filled with different colored pills.
"Take one of each before bed," said Dr. Grop.
Then they filed out the front door, followed by Dr. Bumble.
That night, Camilla took her medicine. 
It was awful. 
When she woke up the next morning, she did feel different, but when she got dressed, her clothes didn’t fit right. 
She looked in the mirror, and there, staring back at her, was a giant, multi colored pill with her face on it.
Dr. Bumble rushed over as soon as Mrs. Cream called. 
But this time, instead of the Specialists, he brought the Experts.
Dr. Gourd and Mr. Mellon were the finest scientific minds in the land. 
Once again, Camilla was poked and prodded, looked at and listened to.
The Experts wrote down lots of numbers. 
Then they huddled together and whispered.
Dr. Gourd finally spoke. 
"It might be a virus," he announced with authority. 
Suddenly, fuzzy little virus balls appeared all over Camilla.
"Or possibly some form of bacteria," said Mr. Mellon. 
Out popped squiggly little bacteria tails.
"Or it could be a fungus," added Dr. Gourd. 
Instantly, Camilla was covered with different colored fungus blotches.
The Experts looked at Camilla, then at each other. 
"We need to go over these numbers again back at the lab," Dr. Gourd explained. 
"We’ll call you when we know something." 
But the experts didn’t have a clue, much less a cure.
By now, the T.V. news had found out about Camilla. 
Reporters from every channel were outside her house, telling the story of "The Bizarre Case of the Incredible Changing Kid."
Soon a huge crowd was camped out on the front lawn. 
The Creams were swamped with all kinds of remedies from psychologists, allergists, herbalists, nutritionists, psychics, an old medicine man, a guru, and even a veterinarian. 
Each so-called cure only added to poor Camilla’s strange appearance until it was hard to even recognize her.
She sprouted roots and berries and crystals and feathers and a long furry tail.
But nothing worked.
One day, a woman who called herself an Environmental Therapist claimed she could cure Camilla. 
"Close your eyes," she said. 
"Breathe deeply, and become one with your room."
"I wish you hadn’t said that," Camilla groaned.
Slowly, she started to melt into the walls of her room.
Her bed became her mouth, her nose was a dresses, and two paintings were her eyes.
The therapist screamed and ran from the house. 
"What are we going to do?" cried Mrs. Cream.
"It just keeps getting worse and worse!" She began to sob. 
At that moment, Mr. Cream heard a quiet little knock at the front door.
He opened it, and there stood an old woman who was just as plump and sweet as a strawberry.
"Excuse me," she said brightly. 
"But I think I can help."
She went into Camilla’s room and looked around. 
"My goodness," she said with a shake of her head.
"What we have here is a bad case of stripes. 
One of the worst I’ve ever seen!"
She pulled a container of small green beans from her bag.
"Here," she said. 
"These might do the trick."
"Are those magic beans?" asked Mrs. Cream.
"Oh my, ho," replied the kind old woman. 
"There’s no such thing. These are just plain old lima beans. 
I’ll bet you’d like some, wouldn’t you?" she asked Camilla.
Camilla wanted a big, heaping plateful of lima beans more than just about anything, but she was still afraid to admit it.
"Yuck!" she said. 
"No one likes lima beans, especially me!"
"Oh, dear," the old woman said sadly. 
"l guess I was wrong about you." 
She put the beans back in her bag and started toward the door.
Camilla watched the old woman walk away. 
Those beans would taste so good. 
And being laughed at for eating them was nothing, compared to what she’d been going through. 
She finally couldn’t stand it.
"Wait!" she cried. 
"The truth is . . . I really love lima beans."
"l thought so," the old woman said with a smile. 
She took a handful of beans and popped them into Camilla’s mouth.
"Mmmm," said Camilla.
Suddenly the branches, feathers, and squiggly tails began to disappear.
Then the whole room swirled around. 
When it stopped, there stood Camilla, and everything was back to normal.
"I’m cured!" she shouted.
"Yes," said the old woman. 
"I knew the real you was in there somewhere." 
She patted Camilla on the head. 
Then she went outside and vanished into the crowd.
Afterward, Camilla wasn’t quite the same.
Some of the kids at school said she was weird, but she didn’t care a bit.
She ate all the lima beans she wanted, and she never had even a touch of stripes again. 

Title: Don’t Let the Pigeon Drive the Bus
Author: Mo Willems
I thought he’d never leave. 
Hey, can I drive the bus?
Please?
I’ll be careful.
I tell you what: I’ll just steer.
My cousin Herb drives a bus almost every day!
True story.
VROOM-VROOM VROOMY VROOM-VROOM!
PIGEON AT THE WHEEL!
No?
I never get to do anything!
Hey, I’ve got an idea. 
Let’s play "Drive the Bus!"
I’ll go first!
C’mon! 
Just once around the block!
I’ll be your best friend!
How ‘bout I give you five bucks?
No fair!
I bet your mom would let me.
What’s the big deal!?
It’s just a bus!!!
I have dreams, you know!
Fine.
LET ME DRIVE THE BUS!!!
I’m back!
You didn’t let the pigeon drive the bus, did you?
Great! 
Thanks a lot.
Bye!
Hey. . . 

Title: The Napping House
Author: Audrey Wood
There is a house, a napping house, where everyone is sleeping.
And in that house there is a bed, a cozy bed in a napping house, where everyone is sleeping. 
And on that bed there is a granny, a snoring granny on a cozy bed in a napping house, where everyone is sleeping. 
And on that granny there is a child, a dreaming child on a snoring granny on a cozy bed in a napping house, where everyone is sleeping.
And on that child there is a dog, a dozing dog on a dreaming child on a snoring granny on a cozy bed in a napping house, where everyone is sleeping. 
And on that dog there is a cat, a snoozing cat on a dozing dog on a dreaming child on a snoring granny on a cozy bed in a napping house, where everyone is sleeping. 
And on that cat there is a mouse, a slumbering mouse on a snoozing cat on a dozing dog on a dreaming child on a snoring granny on a cozy bed in a napping house where everyone is sleeping. 
And on that mouse there is a flea. . . 
Can it be?
A wakeful flea on a slumbering mouse on a snoozing cat on a dozing dog on a dreaming child on a snoring granny on a cozy bed in a napping house, where everyone is sleeping. 
A wakeful flea who bites the mouse, who scares the cat, who claws the dog, who thumps the child, who bumps the granny, who breaks the bed, in the napping house, where no one now is sleeping. 

Title: Mike Mulligan and his Steam Shovel
Author: Virginia Lee Burton 
Mike Mulligan had a steam shovel, a beautiful red steam shovel.
Her name was Mary Anne.
Mike Mulligan was very proud of Mary Anne.
He always said that she could dig as much in a day as a hundred men could dig in a week, but he had never been quite sure that this was true.
Mike Mulligan and Mary Anne had been digging together for years and years.
Mike Mulligan took such good care of Mary Anne she never grew old.
It was Mike Mulligan and Mary Anne and some others who dug the great canals for the big boats to sail through.
It was Mike Mulligan and Mary Anne and some others who cut through the high mountains so that trains could go through.
It was Mike Mulligan and Mary Anne and some others who lowered the hills and straightened the curves to make the long highways for the automobiles. 
It was Mike Mulligan and Mary Anne and some others who smoothed out the ground and filled in the holes to make the landing fields for the airplanes. 
And it was Mike Mulligan and Mary Anne and some others who dug the deep holes for the cellars of the tall skyscrapers in the big cities. 
When people used to stop and watch them, Mike Mulligan and Mary Anne used to dig a little faster and a little better.
The more people stopped, the faster and better they dug.
Some days they would keep as many as thirty-seven trucks busy taking away the dirt they had dug.
Then along came the new gasoline shovels and the new electric shovels and the new Diesel motor shovels and took all the jobs away from the steam shovels.
Mike Mulligan and Mary Anne were VERY SAD. 
All the other steam shovels were being sold for junk, or left out in old gravel pits to rust and fall apart.
Mike loved Mary Anne.
He couldn’t do that to her.
He had taken such good care of her that she could still dig as much in a day as a hundred men could dig in a week; at least he thought she could but he wasn’t quite sure.
Everywhere they went the new gas shovels and the new electric shovels and the new Diesel motor shovels had all the jobs. 
No one wanted Mike Mulligan and Mary Anne any more. 
Then one day Mike read in a newspaper that the town of Popperville was going to build a new town hall.
"We are going to dig the cellar of that town hall," said Mike to Mary Anne, and off they started. 
They left the canals and the railroads and the highways and the airports and the big cities where no one wanted them anymore and went away out in the country.
They crawled along slowly up the hills and down the hills till they came to the little town of Popperville.
When they got there they found that the selectmen were just deciding who should dig the cellar for the new town hall.
Mike Mulligan spoke to Henry B. Swap, one of the selectmen.
"I heard," he said, "that you are going to build a new town hall. 
Mary Anne and I will dig the cellar for you in just one day."
"What!" said Henry B. Swap. 
"Dig a cellar in a day! 
It would take a hundred men at least a week to dig the cellar for our new town hall."
"Sure," said Mike, "but Mary Anne can dig as much in a day as a hundred men can dig in a week."
Though he had never been quite sure that this was true.
Then he added, "If we can’t do it, you won’t have to pay."
Henry B. Swap thought that this would be an easy way to get part of the cellar dug for nothing, so he smiled in rather a mean way and gave the job of digging the cellar of the new town hall to Mike Mulligan and Mary Anne. 
They started in early the next morning just as the sun was coming up. 
Soon a little boy came along.
"Do you think you will finish by sundown?" he said to Mike Mulligan. 
"Sure," said Mike, "if you stay and watch us. 
We always work faster and better when someone is watching us."
So the little boy stayed to watch.
Then Mrs. McGillicuddy, Henry B. Swap, and the Town Constable came over to see what was happening, and they stayed to watch.
Mike Mulligan and Mary Anne dug a little faster and a little better. 
This gave the little boy a good idea.
He ran off and told the postman with-the morning mail, the telegraph boy on his bicycle, the milkman with his cart and horse, the doctor on his way home, and the farmer and his family coming into town for the day, and they all stopped and stayed to watch.
That made Mike Mulligan and Mary Anne dig a little faster and a little better.
They finished the first corner neat and square. . .  but the sun was getting higher.
Clang! 
Clang! 
Clang!
The Fire Department arrived.
They had seen the smoke and thought there was a fire.
Then the little boy said, "Why don’t you stay and watch?" 
So the Fire Department of Popperville stayed to watch Mike Mulligan and Mary Anne.
When they heard the fire engine, the children in the school across the street couldn’t keep their eyes on their lessons. 
The teacher called a long recess and the whole school came out to watch.
That made Mike Mulligan and Mary Anne dig still faster and still better.
They finished the second corner neat and square, but the sun was right up in the top of the sky. 
Now the girl who answers the telephone called up the next towns of Bangerville and Bopperville and Kipperville and Kopperville and told them what was happening in Popperville.
All the people came over to see if Mike Mulligan and his steam shovel could dig the cellar in just one day. 
The more people came, the faster Mike Mulligan and Mary Anne dug. 
But they would have to hurry.
They were only halfway and the sun was beginning to go down.
They finished the third corner. . .  neat and square.
Never had Mike Mulligan and Mary Anne had so many people to watch them; never had they dug so fast and so well; and never, had the sun seemed to go down so fast.
"Hurry, Mike Mulligan! Hurry! Hurry!’ shouted the little boy.
"There’s not much more time!"
Dirt was flying everywhere, and the smoke and steam were so thick that the people could hardly see anything.
But listen!
Bing! 
Bang! 
Crash! 
Slam!
Faster and faster.
Then suddenly it was quiet.
Slowly the dirt settled down.
The smoke and steam cleared away, and there was the cellar all finished.
Four corners. . .  neat and square; four walls. . .  straight down, and Mike Mulligan and Mary Anne at the bottom, and the sun was just going down behind the hill.
"Hurray!" shouted the people. 
"Hurray for Mike Mulligan and his steam shovel! 
They have dug the cellar in just one day."
Suddenly the little boy said, "How are they going to get out?"
"That’s right," said Ms. McGillicuddy to Henry B. Swap.
"How is he going to het his steam shovel out?"
Henry B. Swap didn’t answer, but he smiled in rather a mean way.
Then everybody said, "How are they going to get out? 
"Hi!
 Mike Mulligan! 
How are you going to get your steam shovel out?"
Mike Mulligan looked around at the four square walls and four square corners, and he said, "We’ve dug so fast and we’ve dug so well that we’ve quite forgotten to leave a way out!"
Nothing like this had ever happened to Mike Mulligan and Mary Anne before and they didn’t know what to do. 
Nothing like this had ever happened before in Popperville.
Everybody started talking at once, and everybody had a different idea, and everybody thought that his idea was the best.
They talked and they talked and they argued and they fought till they were worn out, and still no one knew how to get Mike Mulligan and Mary Anne out of the cellar they had dug. 
Then Henry B. Swap said, "The job isn’t finished because Mary Anne isn’t out of the cellar, so Mike Mulligan won’t get paid."
And he smiled again in a rather mean way.
Now the little boy, who had been keeping very quiet, had another good idea.
He said, "why couldn’t we leave Mary Anne in the cellar and build the new town hall above her? 
Let her be the furnace for the new town hall and let Mike Mulligan be the janitor. 
Then you wouldn’t have to buy a new furnace, and we could pay Mike Mulligan for digging the cellar in just one day."
"Why not?" said Henry B. Swap, and smiled in a way that was not quite so mean.
"Why not?" said the Town Constable.
"Why not?" said all the people.
So they found a ladder and climbed down into the cellar to ask Mike Mulligan and Mary Anne. 
"Why not?" said Mike Mulligan.
So it was decided, and everybody was happy. 
They built the new town hall right over Mike Mulligan and Mary Anne.
It was finished before winter.
Every day the little boy goes over to see Mike Mulligan and Mary Anne and Mrs. McGillicuddv takes him nice hot apple pies. 
As for Henry B. Swap, he spends most of his time in the cellar of the new town hall listening to the stories that Mike Mulligan has to tell and smiling in a way that isn’t mean at all.
Now when you go to Popperville, be sure to go down in the cellar of the new town hall.
There they’ll be, Mike Mulligan and Mary Anne. . .  
Mike in his rocking chair smoking his pipe, and Mary Anne beside him warming up his meetings in the new town hall. 

Title: The Story of Babar
Author: Jean De Brunhoff
In the great forest a little elephant is born.
His name is Babar.
His mother loves him very much.
She rocks him to sleep with her trunk while singing softly to him.
Babar has grown bigger. 
He now plays with the other little elephants. 
He is a very good little elephant. 
See him digging in the sand with his shell. 
Babar is riding happily on his mother’s back when a wicked hunter, hidden behind some bushes, shoots at them.
The hunter has killed Babar’s mother!
The monkey hides, the birds fly away, Babar cries.
The hunter runs up to catch Babar.
Babar runs away because he is afraid of the hunter.
After several days, very tired indeed, he comes to a town. . . 
He hardly knows what to make of it because this is the first time that he has seen so many houses.
So many things are new to him!
The broad streets!
The automobiles and buses!
However, he is especially interested in two gentlemen he notices on the street.
He says to himself: "Really, they are very well dressed.
I would like to have some fine clothes, too!
I wonder how I can get them?"
Luckily, a very rich Old Lady who has always been fond of little elephants understands right away that he is longing for a fine suit.
As she likes to make people happy, she gives him her purse.
Babar says to her politely: "Thank you, Madam."
Without wasting any time, Babar goes into a big store.
He enters the elevator.
It is such fun to ride up and down in this funny box, that he rides all the way up ten times and all the way down ten times.
He did not want to stop but the elevator boy finally said to him: "This is not a toy, Mr. Elephant.
You must get out and do your shopping.
Look, here is the floorwalker."
Babar then buys himself: a shirt with a collar and a tie, a suit of a becoming shade of green, then a handsome derby hat, and also shoes with spats. 
Well satisfied with his purchases and feeling elegant indeed, Babar now goes to the photographer to have his picture taken.
And here is his photograph.
Babar dines with his friend the Old Lady.
She thinks he looks very smart in his new clothes.
After dinner, because he is tired, he goes to bed and falls asleep very quickly.
Babar now lives at the Old Lady’s house.  
In the mornings, he does setting-up exercises with her, and then takes his bath.
He goes out for an automobile ride every day.  
The Old Lady has given him a car.
She gives him whatever he wants.
A learned professor gives him lessons.
Babar pays attention and does well in his work.
He is a good pupil and makes rapid progress.
In the evening, after dinner, he tells the Old Lady’s friends about his life in the great forest.
However, Babar is not quite happy, for he misses playing in the great forest with his little cousins and his friends, the monkeys.
He often stands at the window, thinking sadly of his childhood, and cries when he remembers his mother.
Two years have passed.
one day during his walk he sees two little elephants coming toward him.
They have no clothes on.
"Why," he says in astonishment to the Old Lady, "it’s Arthur and Celeste, my little cousins!"
Babar kisses them affectionately and hurries off with them to buy them some fine clothes.
He takes them to a pastry shop to eat some good cakes.
Meanwhile, in the forest, the elephants are searching high and low for Arthur and Celeste, and their mothers are worried.
Fortunately, in flying over the town, an old marabou bird has seen them and comes back quickly to tell the news.
The mothers of Arthur and Celeste have come to the town to fetch them back but they scold them just the same because they ran away.
Babar makes up his mind to go back with Arthur and Celeste and their mothers to see the great forest again,
The Old Lady helps him to pack his trunk.
They are all ready to start.
Babar kisses the Old Lady good-bye.
He would be quite happy to go if it were not for leaving her.
He promises to come back some day.
He will never forget her.
They have gone. . . .
There is no room in the car for the mothers, so they run behind, and lift up their trunks to avoid breathing the dust.
The Old Lady is left alone.
Sadly she wonders: "When shall I see my little Babar again?"
Alas, that very day, the King of the elephants had eaten a bad mushroom.
It poisoned him and he became ill, so ill that he died.
This was a great calmity.
After the funeral the oldest elephants were holding a meeting to choose a new king.
Just then they hear a noise.
They turn around.
Guess what they see!
Babar arriving in his car and all the elephants running and shouting: " Here they are!
Here they are!
Hello, Babar!
Hello, Arthur!
Hello, Celeste!
What beautiful clothes!
What a beautiful car!"
Then Cornelius, the oldest of all the elephants, spoke in his quavering voice: "My good friends we are seeking a King.
Why not choose Babar?
He has just returned from the big city, he has learned so much among living men. 
Let us crown him King."
All the other elephants thought that Cornelius had spoken wisely and eagerly await Babar’s reply.
"I want to thank you one and all," said Babar, "but before accepting your proposal, I must explain to you that, while traveling in the car, Celeste and I became engaged.
If I become your King, she will be your Queen."
"Long live Queen Celeste!"
"Long live King Babar!", cry all the elephants without a moment’s hesitation.
And thus it was that Babar became King.
"You have good ideas," said Babar to Cornelius.
"I will therefore make you a general, and when I get my crown, I will give you my hat.
In a week I shall marry Celeste.
We will have a spendid party in honor of our marriage and our coronation."
Then, turning to the birds, Babar asks them to go and invite all the animals to the festivities, and he tells the dromedary to go to the town and buy some beautiful wedding clothes.
The wedding guests begin to arrive.  
The dromedary returns with the bridal costumes just in the nick of time for the ceremony. 
After the wedding and the coronation everybody dances merrily.
The festivities are over, night has fallen, the stars have risen in the sky.  
King Babar and Queen Celeste are indeed very happy.
Now the world is asleep. 
The guests have gone home, happy, though tired from too much dancing. 
They will long remember this great celebration.
And now King Babar and Queen Celeste, both eager for further adventures, set out on their honeymoon in a gorgeous yellow balloon.

Title: Where the Wild Things Are
Author:Maurice Sendak
The night Max wore his wolf suit and made mischief of one kind and another his mother called his "Wild Thing!" and Max said "I’ll eat you up!" so he was sent to bed without eating anything.
That night in Max’s room a forest grew and grew- and grew until his ceiling hung with vines and the walls became the world all around and an ocean tumbled by with a private boat for Max and he sailed off through the night and day and in and out of weeks and almost over a year to where the wild things are.
And when he came to the place where the wild things are they roared their terrible roars and gnashed their terrible teeth and rolled their terrible eyes and showed their terrible claws till Max said "Be still!" and tamed them with the magic trick of staring into all their yellow eyes without blinking once and they were frightened and called him the most wild thing of all and made him king of all the wild things.
"And now," cried Max, "let the wild rumpus start!"
"Now stop!" Max said and sent all the wild things off to bed without their supper.
And Max king of all the wild things was lonely and wanted to be where someone loved him best of all.
Then all around from far away across the world he smelled good things to eat so he gave up being king of where the wild things are.
But the wild things cried, "Oh please don’t go-we’ll eat you up- we love you so!"
And Max said, "No!"
The wild things roared their terrible roars and gnashed their terrible teeth and rolled their terrible eyes and showed their terrible claws but Max stepped into his private boat and wave good-bye and sailed back over a year and in and out of weeks and through a day and into the night of his very own room where he found his supper waiting for him and it was still hot.

Title: The Tale of Peter Rabbit
Author:
Once upon a time there were four little Rabbits and their names were – Flopsy, Mopsy, Cottontail, and Peter.
They lived with their mother in a sandbank, underneath the root of a very big fir tree.
"Now, my dears," said old Mrs. Rabbit one morning, "you may go into the fields or down the lane, but don’t go into Mr. McGregor’s garden: your father had an accident there; he was put in a pie by Mrs. McGregor."
"Now run along, and don’t get into mischief.
I am going out."
Then old Mrs. Rabbit took a basket and her umbrella, and went through the wood to the baker’s.
She bought a loaf of brown bread and five currant buns.
Flopsy, Mopsy, and Cottontail, who were good little bunnies, went down the lane to gather blackberries.
But Peter, who was very naughty, ran straight away to Mr. McGregor’s garden, and squeezed under the gate!
First he ate some lettuces and some French beans; and then he ate some radishes; and then, feeling rather sick, he went to look for some parsley.
But round the end of a cucumber frame, whom should be meet but Mr. McGregor!
Mr. McGregor was on his hands and knees planting out young cabbages, but he jumped up and ran after Peter, waving a rake and calling out, "Stop thief!"
Peter was most dreadfully frightened; he rushed all over the garden, for he had forgotten the way back to the gate.
He lost one of his shoes among the cabbages, and the other shoe amongst the potatoes.
After losing them, he ran on four legs and went faster, so that I think he might have got away altogether if he had not unfortunately run into a gooseberry net, and got caught by the large buttons on his jacket.
It was a blue jacket with brass buttons, quite new.
Peter gave himself up for lost, and shed big tears; but his sobs were overheard by some friendly sparrows, who flew to him in great excitement, and implored him to exert himself.
Mr. McGregor came up with a sieve, which he intended to pop upon the top of Peter; but Peter wriggled out just in time, leaving his jacket behind him, and rushed into the toolshed, and jumped into a can.
It would have been a beautiful thing to hide in, if it had not had so much water in it.
Mr. McGregor was quite sure that Peter was somewhere in the toolshed, perhaps hidden underneath a flowerpot.
He began to turn them over carefully, looking under each.
Presently Peter sneezed – "Kertyschoo!"
Mr. McGregor was after him in no time, and tried to put his foot upon Peter, who jumped out of a window, upsetting three plants.
The window was too small for Mr. McGregor, and he was tired of running after Peter.
He went back to his work.
Peter sat down to rest.
He was out of breath and trembling with fright, and he had no the least idea which way to go.
Also, he was very damp with sitting in that can.
After a time began to wander about, going lippity – lippity – not very fast, and looking all around.
He found a door in a wall; but it was locked, and there was no room for a fat little rabbit to squeeze underneath.
An old mouse was running in and out over the stone doorstep, carrying peas and beans to her family in the wood.
Peter asked her the way to the gate, but she had such a large pea in her mouth that she could not answer.
She only shook her head at him.
Peter began to cry.
Then he tried to find his way straight across the garden, but he became more and more puzzled.
Presently, he came to a pond where Mr. McGregor filled his water cans.
A white cat was staring at some goldfish; she sat very, very still, but now and then the tip of her tail twitched as if it were alive.
Peter thought it best to go away without speaking to her; he had heard about cats from his cousin, little Benjamin Bunny.
He went back towards the toolshed, but suddenly, quite close to him, he heard the noise of a hoe – scr-r-ritch, scratch, scratch, scritch.
Peter scuttered underneath the bushes.
But presently, as nothing happened, he came out, and climbed upon a wheelbarrow, and peeped over.
The first thing he saw was Mr. McGregor hoeing his onions.
His back was turned towards Peter, and beyond him was the gate.
Peter got down very quietly off the wheelbarrow, and started running as fast as he could go, along a straight walk behind some black-currant bushes.
Mr. McGregor caught sight of him at the corner, but Peter did not care.
He slipped underneath the gate, and was safe at last in the wood outside the garden.
Mr. McGregor hung up the little jacket and the shoes for a scarecrow to frighten blackbirds.
Peter never stopped running or looked behind him till he got home to the big fir tree.
He was so tired that he flopped down upon the nice soft sand on the floor of the rabbit hole, and shut his eyes.
His mother was busy cooking; she wondered what he had done with his clothes.
It was the second little jacket and pair of shoes that Peter had lost in a fortnight!
I’m sorry to say that Peter was not very well during the evening.
His mother put him to bed, and made some chamomile tea; and she gave a dose of it to Peter!
"One tablespoonful to be taken at bedtime."
But Flopsy, Mopsy, and Cottontail had bread and milk and blackberries for supper.
The End.

Title: The Story of Ferdinand
Author: Munro Leaf
Once upon a time in Spain there was a little bull and his name was Ferdinand.
All the other little bulls he lived with would run and jump and butt their heads together, but not Ferdinand.
He liked to sit just quietly and smell the flowers.
He had a favorite spot out in the pasture under a cork tree.
It was his favorite tree and he would sit in its shade all day and smell the flowers.
Sometimes his mother, who was a cow, would worry about him.
She was afraid he would be lonesome all by himself.
"Why don’t you run and play with the other little bulls and skip and butt your head?" she would say.
But Ferdinand would shake his head." 
I like it better here where I can sit just quietly and smell the flowers."
His mother saw that he was not lonesome, and because she was an understanding mother, even though she was a cow, she let him just sit there and be happy.
As the years went by Ferdinand grew and grew until he was very big and strong.
All the other bulls who had grown up with him in the same pasture would fight each other all day. 
They would butt each other and stick each other with their horns. 
What they wanted most of all was to be picked to fight at the bull fights in Madrid.
But not Ferdinand - he still liked to sit just quietly under the cork tree and smell the flowers.
One day five men came in very funny hats to pick the biggest, fastest, roughest bull to fight in the bull fights in Madrid.
All the other bulls ran around snorting and butting, leaping and jumping so the men would think that they were very very strong and fierce and pick them.
Ferdinand knew that they wouldn’t pick him and he didn’t care. 
So he went out to his favorite cork tree to sit down.
He didn’t look where he was sitting and instead of sitting on the nice cool grass in the shade he sat on a bumble bee.
Well, if you were a bumble bee and a bull sat on you what would you do? 
You would sting him. 
And that is just what this bee did to Ferdinand.
Wow! 
Did it hurt! 
Ferdinand jumped up with a snort.
He ran around puffing and snorting, butting and pawing the ground as if he were crazy.
The five men saw him and they all shouted with joy. 
Here was the largest and fiercest bull of all. 
Just the one for the bull fights in Madrid!
So they rook him away for the bull fight day in a cart.
What a day it was! 
Flags were flying, bands were playing . . . and all the lovely ladies had flowers in their hair.
They had a parade into the bull ring.
First came the Banderilleros with long sharp pins with ribbons on them to stick in the bull and make him mad.
Next came the Picadores who rode skinny horses and they had long spears to stick in the bull and make him madder.
Then came the Matador, the proudest of all - he thought he was very handsome, and bowed to the ladies. 
He had a red cape and a sword and was supposed to stick the bull last of all.
Then came the bull, and you know who that was don’t you?
Ferdinand.
They called him Ferdinand the Fierce and all the Banderilleros were afraid of him and the Picadores were afraid of him and the Matador was scared stiff.
Ferdinand ran to the middle of the ring and everyone shouted and clapped because they thought he was going to fight fiercely and butt and snort and stick his horns around.
But not Ferdinand. 
When he got to the middle of the ring he saw the flowers in all the lovely ladies’ hair and he just sat down quietly and smelled.
He wouldn’t fight and be fierce no matter what they did.
 He just sat and smelled. 
And the Banderilleros were mad and the Picadores were madder and the Matador was so mad he cried because he couldn’t show off with his cape and sword.
So they had to take Ferdinand home.
And for all I know he is sitting there still, under his favorite cork tree, smelling the flowers just quietly.
He is very happy.
The end

Title: Are You My Mother?
Author: P.D. Eastman
A mother bird sat on her egg.
The egg jumped. 
"Oh oh!" said the mother bird. 
"My baby will be here! 
He will want to eat."
"I must get something for my baby bird to eat!" she said.
"I will be back!"
So away she went. 
The egg jumped. 
It jumped, and jumped, and jumped!
Out came the baby bird!
"Where is my mother?" he said.
He looked for her.
He looked up. 
He did not see her.
He looked down.
He did not see her. 
"I will go and look for her," he said.
So away he went.
Down, out of the tree he went.
Down, down, down!
It was a long way down. 
The baby bird could not fly.
He could not fly, but he could walk. 
"Now I will go and find my mother," he said.
He did not know what his mother looked like. 
He went right by her. 
He did not see her.
He came to a kitten.
"Are you my mother?" he said to the kitten.
The kitten just looked and looked.
It did not say a thing. 
The kitten was not his mother, so he went on.
Then he came to a hen.
"Are you my mother?" he said to the hen.
"No," said the hen.
The kitten was not his mother.
The hen was not his mother.
So the baby bird went on.
"I have to find my mother!" he said. 
"But where? Where is she? Where could she be?"
Then he came to a dog.
"Are you my mother?" he said to the dog.
"I am not your mother. 
I am a dog," said the dog. 
The kitten was not his mother. 
The hen was not his mother. 
The dog was not his mother.
So the baby bird went on. 
Now he came to a cow.
"Are you my mother?" he said to the cow. 
"How could I be your mother?" said the cow.
"I am a cow."
The kitten and the hen were not his mother.
The dog and the cow were not his mother.
Did he have a mother?
"I did have a mother," said the baby bird. 
"I know I did.
 I have to find her.
 I will.
 I WILL!"
Now the baby bird did not walk. 
He ran!
Then he saw a car.
Could that old thing be his mother? 
No, it could not.
The baby bird did not stop. 
He ran on and on.
Now he looked way, way down. 
He saw a boat. 
"There she is!" said the baby bird.
He called to the boat, but the boat did not stop.
The boat went on.
He looked way, way up.
He saw a big plane.
"Here I am, Mother," he called out.
But the plane did not stop.
The plane went on.
Just then, the baby bird saw a big thing. 
This must be his mother!
"There she is!" he said.
"There is my mother!"
He ran right up to it.
"Mother, Mother! Here I am, Mother!" he said to the big thing.
But the big thing just said, "Snort."
"Oh, you are not my mother," said the baby bird. "You are a Snort.
 I have to get out of here!"
But the baby bird could not get away.
The Snort went up.
It went way, way up.
And up, up, up went the baby bird.
But now, where was the Snort going?
"Oh, oh, oh! 
What is this Snort going to do to me? 
Get me out of here!"
Just then, the Snort came to a stop.
"Where am I?" said the baby bird.
"I want to go home!
 I want a mother!"
Then something happened.
The Snort put that baby bird right back in the tree. 
The baby bird was home!
Just then the mother bird came back to the tree. 
Do you know who I am? she said to her baby.
"Yes, I know who you are," said the baby bird.
"You are not a kitten.
"You are not a hen.
"You are not a dog.
"You are not a cow.
"You are not a boat, or a plane, or a Snort!"
"You are a bird, and you are my mother."

Title: Chrysanthemum 
Author: Kevin Henkes
The day she was born was the happiest day in her parents’ lives.
"She’s perfect," said her mother.
"Absolutely," said her father.
And she was.
She was absolutely perfect.
"Her name must be everything she is," said her mother.
"Her name must be absolutely perfect," said her father.
And it was.
Chrysanthemum. 
Her parents named her Chrysanthemum.
Chrysanthemum grew and grew and grew.
And when she was old enough to appreciate it, Chrysanthemum loved her name.
She loved the way it sounded when her mother woke her up.
She loved the way it sounded when her father called her for dinner.
And she loved the way it sounded when she whispered it to herself in the bathroom mirror. 
Chrysanthemum, Chrysanthemum, Chrysanthemum.
Chrysanthemum loved the way her name looked when it was written with ink on an envelope.
She loved the way it looked when it was written with icing on her birthday cake. 
And she loved the way it looked when she wrote it herself with her fat orange crayon.
Chrysanthemum, Chrysanthemum, Chrysanthemum.
Chrysanthemum thought her name was absolutely perfect.
And then she started school.
On the first day, Chrysanthemum wore her sunniest dress and her brightest smile. 
She ran all the way.
"Hooray! " said Chrysanthemum. 
"School!"
But when Mrs. Chud took roll call, everyone giggled upon hearing Chrysanthemum’s name.
"It’s so long," said Jo.
"It scarcely fits on your name tag," said Rita, pointing.
"I’m named after my grandmother," said Victoria.
"You’re named after a flower!"
Chrysanthemum wilted.
She did not think her name was absolutely perfect.
She thought it was absolutely dreadful. 
The rest of the day was not much better.
During naptime Victoria raised her hand and informed Mrs. Chud that Chrysanthemum’s name was spelled with thirteen letters.
"That’s exactly half as many letters as there are in the entire alphabet!" Victoria explained.
"Thank you for sharing that with us, Victoria," said Mrs. Chud.
"Now put your head down."
"If I had a name like yours, I’d change it," Victoria said as the students lined up to go home.
I wish I could, thought Chrysanthemum miserably.
"Welcome home!" said her mother.
"Welcome home!" said her father.
"School is no place for me," said Chrysanthemum.
"My name is too long. 
It scarcely fits on my name tag. 
And I’m named after a flower!"
"Oh pish," said her mother.
"Your name is beautiful."
"And her precious and priceless and fascinating and winsome," said her father.
"It’s everything you are," said her mother.
"Absolutely perfect," said her father.
Chrysanthemum felt much better after her favorite dinner (macaroni and cheese with ketchup) and an evening filled with hugs and kisses and Parcheesi.
That night Chrysanthemum dreamed that her name was Jane.
It was an extremely pleasant dream. 
The next morning Chrysanthemum wore her most comfortable jumper. 
She walked to school as slowly as she could.
She dragged her feet in the dirt.
Chrysanthemum, Chrysanthemum, Chrysanthemum, she wrote.
"She even looks like a flower," said Victoria, as Chrysanthemum entered the playground.
"Let’s pick her," said Rita, pointing.
"Let’s smell her," said Jo.
Chrysanthemum wilted.
She did not think her name was absolutely perfect.
She thought it was absolutely dreadful.
The rest of the day was not much better.
During naptime Victoria raised her hand and said, "A chrysanthemum is a flower.
 It lives in a garden with worms and other dirty things."
"Thank you for sharing that with us, Victoria," said Mrs. Chud.
"Now put your head down."
"I just cannot believe your name," Victoria said as the students lined up to go home.
Neither can I, thought Chrysanthemum miserably.
"’Welcome home!" said her mother.
"’Welcome home!" said her father.
"School is no place for me," said Chrysanthemum. 
"They said I even looked like a flower. 
They pretended to pick me and smell me."
"Oh, pish," said her mother. 
They’re just jealous.
"And envious and begrudging and discontented and jaundiced," said her father.
"’Who wouldn’t be jealous of a name like yours?" said her mother.
"After all, it’s absolutely perfect," said her father.
Chrysanthemum felt a trifle better after her favorite dessert (chocolate cake with buttercream frosting) and another evening filled with hugs and kisses and Parcheesi.
That night Chrysanthemum dreamed that she really was a chrysanthemum.
She sprouted leaves and petals. 
Victoria picked her and plucked the leaves and petals one by one until there was nothing left but a scrawny stem.
It was the worst nightmare of Chrysanthemum’s life.
Chrysanthemum wore her outfit with seven pockets the next morning.
She loaded the pockets with her most prized possessions and her good-luck charms.
Chrysanthemum took the longest route possible to school.
She stopped and stared at each and every flower.
"Chrysanthemum, Chrysanthemum, Chrysanthemum," the flowers seemed to say.
That morning the students were introduced to Mrs. Twinkle, the music teacher.
Her voice was like something out of a dream, as was everything else about her.
The students were speechless.
They thought Mrs. Twinkle was an indescribable wonder.
They went out of their way to make a nice impression.
Mrs. Twinkle led the students in scales.
Then she assigned roles for the class musicale.
Victoria was chosen as the dainty Fairy Queen.
Rita was chosen as the spiffy Butterfly Princess.
Jo was chosen as the all-important Pixie-messenger.
And Chrysanthemum was chosen as a daisy.
"Chrysanthemum’s a daisy! Chrysanthemum’s a daisy!" Jo, Rita, and Victoria chanted, thinking it was wildly funny.
Chrysanthemum wilted.
She did not think her name was absolutely perfect.
She thought it was absolutely dreadful.
"What’s so humorous?" asked Mrs. Twinkle.
"Chrysanthemum!" was the answer.
"Her name is so long," said Jo.
"It scarcely fits on her name tag," said Rita, pointing.
"I’m named after my grandmother," said Victoria.
"She’s named after a flower!"
"My name is long," said Mrs. Twinkle.
"It is?" said Jo.
"My name would scarcely fit on a name tag," said Mrs. Twinkle.
"lt would?" said Rita, pointing.
"And-" said Mrs. Twinkle, "l’m named after a flower, too!"
"You are?" said Victoria.
"Yes," said Mrs. Twinkle. 
"My name is Delphinium.
Delphinium Twinkle. 
And if my baby is a girl, I’m considering Chrysanthemum as a name. 
I think it is absolutely perfect."
Chrysanthemum could scarcely believe her ears.
She blushed.
She beamed.
She bloomed.
Chrysanthemum, Chrysanthemum, Chrysanthemum.
Jo, Rita, and Victoria looked at Chrysanthemum longingly.
"Call me Marigold," said Jo.
"I’m Carnation," said Rita, pointing.
"My name is Lily of the Valley," said Victoria.
Chrysanthemum did not think her name was absolutely perfect.
She knew it!
EPILOGUE:
Overall, the class musical was a huge success.
Chrysanthemum was absolutely perfect as a daisy.
Victoria made the only mistake: She completely forgot her lines as the dainty Fuity Queen.
Chrysanthemum thought it was wildly funny, and she giggled throughout the entire Dance of the Flowers.
Eventually, Mrs. Twinkle gave birth to a healthy baby girl.
And, of course, she named her Chrysanthemum.

Title: Dragons Love Tacos
Author: Adam Rubin
Hey, kid!
Did you know that dragons love tacos?
They love beef tacos and chicken tacos.
They love really big gigantic tacos and tiny little baby tacos as well. 
Why do dragons loves tacos?
Maybe it’s the smell from the sizzling pan.
Maybe it’s the crunch of the crispy tortillas.
Maybe it’s a secret. 
Either way, if you want to make friends with dragons, tacos are key.
Hey dragon, why do you guys love tacos so much?
But wait!
As much as dragons love tacos, they hate spicy salsa even more.
They hate spicy green salsa and spicy red salsa.
They hate spicy chunky salsa and spicy smooth salsa. 
If the salsa is spicy at all, dragons can’t stand it.
Why do dragons hate spicy salsa?
Well, just one drop of hot sauce makes a dragon’s ears smoke.
Just one single speck of hot pepper makes a dragon snort spark. 
Spicy salsa gives dragons the tummy troubles, and when dragons get the tummy troubles – oh boy. . .  
If you want to make tacos for dragons, keep the toppings mild.
Tomatoes, lettuce, cheese, these are all good toppings for tacos for dragons. 
Hey dragon, how do you feel about spicy taco toppings?
Dragons love parties. 
They like costume parties and pool parties.
They like big gigantic parties with accordions and tiny little parties with charades. 
Why do dragons love parties?
Maybe it’s the conversation.
Maybe it’s the dancing.
Maybe it’s the comforting sound of a good friend’s laughter.
The only thing dragons love more than parties or tacos, is taco parties (taco parties are parties with lots of tacos).
If you want to have some dragons over for a taco party, you’ll need buckets of tacos. 
Pantloads of tacos.
The best way to judge is to get a boat and fill the boat with tacos.
That’s about how many tacos dragons need for a taco party.
After all, dragons love tacos. 
Hey dragon, are you excited for the big taco party?
Just remember: Dragons hate spicy salsa.
Before you host your taco party with dragons, get rid of all the spicy salsa.
In fact, bury the spicy salsa in the backyard so the dragons can’t find it. 
These dragons love your taco party! 
They love the music.
They love the decorations.
They especially love the tacos.
Congratulations!
It’s a good thing you got rid of all that spicy. . . 
Wait a second – what are those little green things in the salsa?
You didn’t read the fine print?!
Dragons, listen to me: Do not eat those tacos.
Those little green specs in the salsa?
Those are jalapeno peppers-they are super-spicy!
I know you love tacos, dragons, but you are not gonna love those tacos. 
DO NOT LET THOSE DRAGONS EAT THOSE TACOS!!!
Crunch, crunch, crunch. . . 
Too late. . . 
Why would dragons help you rebuild your house?
Maybe they’re good Samaritans.
Maybe they feel bad for wrecking it.
Maybe they’re just in it for the taco breaks.
After all, dragons love tacos. 

Title: Little Blue Truck Leads the Way
Author: Alice Schertle
Horn went "Beep!"
Engine purred.
Friendliest sounds you ever heard.
Little Blue Truck rolled into the city. 
"Beep! 
Beep! 
Beep! 
Isn’t it pretty?"
Towering buildings scraped the sky.
"Beep!" said Blue.
"The city is high!"
"ZOOOM!" roared trucks down the avenue.
"The city is fast!" said Little Blue.
"Shove on, Shorty!" yelled a double-decker bus with big red letters: RIDES-R-US. 
A grocery truck gave his horn a blast.
"MOVE IT, BUD-I’M FIRST, YOU’RE LAST!"
"Wooeeee. . . " went a siren.
"Coming through!
 Busy police car, things to do!"
"Swish! Swash! Swoosh!" went a big street sweeper, hollering, "HEY! 
BETTER MOVE, LITTLE BEEPER!"
"MAKE WAY!" yelled a limousine (the longest car you’ve ever seen).
"I’ve got His Honor the mayor inside. 
I’m important! 
Move aside!"
Cars and trucks were all in a tangle.
Everyone started to shout and wrangle.
Up roared a taxi.
"Screech," went the brakes.
"STOP!" yelled Blue.
"For goodness’ sakes! 
You might be fast and I might be slow, but one at a time is the way to go."
"Me first!" said the limo, all puffed with pride.
Then he gave a cough and his engine died.
He was stuck right there with the mayor inside.
"Beep!" said Blue.
"Would you like a ride?"
Everybody watching gave a shout when the door swung open and the mayor stepped out.
His Honor climbed right up on Blue and gave a speech (the way mayors do).
"My friends," he said, "what wonderful luck–this good advice from a little blue truck!
One at a time is what we’ll do, so single file, folks-FOLLOW BLUE!"
Trucks and buses got in line with vans and taxis, and it all went fine.
A taxi let a van go past.
The double-decker bus said, "I’ll go last."
A marching band joined the big parade.
"BOOM!" went the drums, and the trumpets played.
They rolled along the avenue and everyone waved to Little Blue.
They clapped their hands and yelled, "HOORAY!" for the little blue truck who led the way.

Title: If You Give a Mouse a Cookie
Author: Laura Joffe Numeroff
If you give a mouse a cookie, he’s going to ask for a glass of milk. 
When you give him the milk, he’ll probably ask you for a straw.
When he’s finished, he’ll ask for a napkin.
Then he’ll want to look in a mirror to make sure he doesn’t have a milk mustache.
When he looks into the mirror, he might notice his hair needs a trim.
So he’ll probably ask for a pair of nail scissors.
When he’s finished giving himself a trim, he’ll want a broom to sweep up.
He’ll start sweeping.
He might get carried away and sweep every room in the house.
He may even end up washing the floors as well!
When he’s done, he’ll probably want to take a nap.
You’ll have to fix up a little box for him with a blanket and a pillow.
He’ll crawl in, make himself comfortable and fluff the pillow a few times.
He’ll probably ask you to read him a story.
So you’ll read to him from one of your books, and he’ll ask to see the pictures.
When he looks at the pictures, he’ll get so excited he’ll want to draw one of his own. 
He’ll ask for paper and crayons.
He’ll draw a picture.
When the picture is finished, he’ll want to sign his name with a pen. 
Then he’ll want to hang his picture on your refrigerator.
Which means he’ll need Scotch tape. 
He’ll hang up his drawing and stand back to look at it.
Looking at the refrigerator will remind him that he’s thirsty. 
So. . .  he’ll ask for a glass of milk. 
And chances are if he asks for a glass of milk, he’s going to want a cookie to go with it.

Title: Oh, the Places You’ll Go
Author: Dr. Seuss
Congratulations!
Today is your day.
You’re off to Great Places!
You’re off and away!
You have brains in your head.
You have feet in your shoes.
You can steer yourself any direction you choose.
You’re on your own. 
And you know what you know.
And YOU are the guy who’ll decide where to go.
You’ll look up and down streets. 
Look ’em over with care.
About some you will say, "I don’t choose to go there."
With your head full of brains and your shoes full of feet, you’re too smart to go down any not-so-good street.
And you may not find any you’ll want to go down.
In that case, of course, you’ll head straight out of town. 
It’s opener there in the wide open air. 
Out there things can happen and frequently do to people as brainy and footsy as you.
And when things start to happen, don’t worry. 
Don’t stew.
Just go right along.
You’ll start happening too.
Oh! 
THE PLACES YOU’LL GO!
You’ll be on your way up!
You’ll be seeing great sights!
You’ll join the high fliers who soar to high heights.
You won’t lag behind, because you’ll have the speed.
You’ll pass the whole gang and you’ll soon take the lead.
Wherever you fly, you’ll be best of the best.
Wherever you go, you will top all the rest.
 Except when you don’t.
Because, sometimes, you won’t.
I’m sorry to say so but, sadly, it’s true that Bang-ups and Hang-ups can happen to you.
You can get all hung up in a prickle-ly perch.
And your gang will fly on.
You’ll be left in a Lurch.
You’ll come down from the Lurch with an unpleasant bump.
And the chances are, then, that you’ll be in Slump.
And when you’re in a Slump, you’re not in for much fun.
Un-slumping yourself is not easily done.
You will come to a place where the streets are not marked.
Some windows are lighted. 
Bur mostly they’re darked.
A place you could sprain both your elbow and chin!
Do you dare to stay out? 
Do you dare to go in?
How much can you lose? 
How much can you win?
And IF you go in, should you turn left or right. . .  or right-and-three-quarters? 
Or, maybe, not quite?
Or go around back and sneak in from behind?
Simple it’s not, I’m afraid you will find, for a mind-maker-upper to make up his mind.
You can get so confused that you’ll start in to race down long wiggled roads at a break-necking pace and grind on for miles across weirdish wild space, headed, I fear, toward a most useless place.
The Waiting Place. . .  for people just waiting. 
Waiting for a train to go or a bus to come, or a plane to go or the mail to come, or the rain to go or the phone to ring, or the snow to snow or waiting around for a yes or No or waiting for their hair to grow.
Everyone is just waiting.
Waiting for the fish to bite or waiting for wind to fly a kite or waiting around for Friday night or waiting, perhaps, for their Uncle Jake or a pot to boil, or a Better Break or a string of pearls, or a pair of pants or a wig with curls, or Another Chance.
Everyone is just waiting.
NO!
That s not for you!
Somehow you’ll escape all that waiting and staying.
You’ll find the bright places where Boom Bands are playing.
With banner flip-flapping, once more you’ll ride high!
Ready for anything under the sky.
Ready because you’re that kind of a guy!
Oh, the places you’ll go! 
There is fun to be done!
There are points to be scored. 
There are games to be won.
And the magical things you can do with that ball will make you the winning-est winner of all.
Fame! 
You’ll be famous as famous can be, with the whole wide world watching you win on TV.
Except when they don’t.
Because, sometimes, they won’t.
I’m afraid that some times you’ll play lonely games too.
Games you can’t win ’cause you’ll play against you.
All alone!
Whether you like it or not, alone will be something you’ll be quite a lot. 
And when you’re alone, there’s a very good chance you’ll meet things that scare you right out of your pants.
There are some, down the road between hither and yon, that can scare you so much you won’t want to go on.
But on you will go though the weather be foul.
On you will go though your enemies prowl.
On you will go though the Hakken-Kraks howl.
Onward up many a frightening creek, though your arms may get sore and your sneakers may leak.
On and on you will hike.
And I know you’ll hike far and face up to your problems whatever they are.
You’ll get mixed up, of course, as you already know.
You’ll get mixed up with many strange birds as you go.
So be sure when you step.
Step with care and great tact and remember that Life’s a Great Balancing Act.
Just never forget to be dexterous and deft.
And never mix up your right foot with your left.
And will you succeed?
Yes!
You will, indeed!
(98 and ¾ percent guaranteed.)
KID, YOU’LL MOVE MOUNTAINS!
So. . .  be your name Buxbaum or Bixby or Bray or Mordecai Ali Van Allen O’Shea, you’re off to Great Places!
Today is your day!
Your mountain is waiting.
So. . . get on your way!

Title: The Little Engine That Could
Author: Watty Piper
Chug, chug, chug. 
Puff, puff, puff. 
Ding-dong, ding-dong.
The little train rumbled over the tracks. 
She was a happy little train for she had such a jolly load to carry. 
Her cars were filled full of good things for boys and girls.
There were toy animals-giraffes with long necks, Teddy bears with almost no necks at all, and even a baby elephant. 
Then there were dolls-dolls with blue eyes and yellow curls, dolls with brown eyes and brown bobbed heads, and the funniest little toy clown you ever saw.
And there were cars full of toy engines, airplanes, tops, jack-knives, picture puzzles, books, and every kind of thing boys or girls could want. 
But that was not all. 
Some of the cars were filled with all sorts of good things for boys and girls to eat-big golden oranges, red-cheeked apples, bottles of creamy milk for their breakfasts, fresh spinach for their dinners, peppermint drops, and lollypops for after-meal treats.
The little train was carrying all these wonderful things to the good little boys and girls on the other side of the mountain.
She puffed along merrily.
"Here comes a shiny new engine," said the funny little clown who jumped out of the train. 
"Let us ask him to help us."
So all the dolls and toys cried out together:
"Please, Shiny New Engine, wont you please pull our train over the mountain? 
Our engine has broken down, and the boys and girls on the other side wont have any toys to play with or good food to eat unless you help us."
But the Shiny New Engine snorted: "l pull you?
I am a Passenger Engine. 
I have just carried a fine big train over the mountain, with more cars than you ever dreamed of. 
My train had sleeping cars, with comfortable berths; a dining-car where waiters bring whatever hungry people want to eat; and parlor cars in which people sit in soft arm-chairs and look out of big plate-glass windows.
"I pull the likes of you?
 Indeed not!"
And off he steamed to the roundhouse, where engines live when they are not busy.
How sad the little train and all the dolls and toys felt!
Then the little clown called out, "The Passenger Engine is not the only one in the world. 
Here is another engine coming, a great big strong one. 
Let us ask him to help us."
The little toy clown waved his flag and the big strong engine came to a stop.
"Please, oh, please, Big Engine," cried all the dolls and toys together.
"Won’t you please pull our train over the mountain? 
Our engine has broken down, and the good little boys and girls on the other side won’t have any toys to play with or good food to eat unless you help us."
But the Big Strong Engine bellowed: "I am a Freight Engine. 
I have just pulled a big train loaded with big machines over the mountain. 
These machines print books and newspapers for grown-ups to read. 
I am a very important engine indeed. 
I wont pull the likes of you!"
And the Freight Engine puffed off indignantly to the roundhouse.
The little train and all the dolls and toys were very sad.
"Cheer up," cried the little toy clown. 
"The Freight Engine is not the only one in the world. 
Here comes another. 
He looks very old and tired, but our train is so little, perhaps he can help us."
So the little toy clown waved his flag and the dingy, rusty old engine stopped. 
"Please, kind Engine," cried all the dolls and toys together.
"Won’t you please pull our train over the mountain? 
Our engine has broken down, and the boys and girls on the other side won’t have any toys to play with or good food to eat unless you help us."
But the Rusty Old Engine sighed: "I am so tired. 
I must rest my weary wheels. 
I cannot pull even so little a train as yours over the mountain. 
I can not.
I can not. 
I can not."
Then indeed the little train was very, very sad, and the dolls and toys were ready to cry.
But the little clown called out, "Here is another engine coming, a little blue engine, a very little one, maybe she will help us."
The very little engine came chug, chugging merrily along.
When she saw the toy clown’s flag, she stopped quickly.
"What is the matter, my friends?" she asked kindly.
"Oh, Little Blue Engine," cried the dolls and toys. 
"Will you pull us over the mountain? 
Our engine has broken down and the good boys and girls on the other side won’t have any toys to play with or good food to eat, unless you help us. 
Please, please, help us, Little Blue Engine."
She tugged and pulled and pulled and tugged and slowly, slowly, slowly they started off.
The toy clown jumped aboard and all the dolls and the toy animals began to smile and cheer.
Puff, puff, chug, chug, went the Little Blue Engine. 
"I think I can
I think I can
I think I can
I think I can
I think I can
I think I can
I think I can
I think I can
I think I can."
Up, up, up.
Faster and faster and faster and faster the little engine climbed, until at last they reached the top of the mountain.
Down in the valley lay the city.
"Hurray, hurray," cried the funny little clown and all the dolls and toys.
"The good little boys and girls in the city will be happy because you helped us, kind, Little Blue Engine."
And the Little Blue Engine smiled and seemed to say as she puffed steadily down the mountain, "I thought I could. 
I thought I could. 
I thought I could. 
I thought I could. 
I thought I could. 
I thought I could." 

Title: Goodnight Moon
Author: Margaret Wise Brown
In the great green room there was a telephone
And a red balloon
And a picture of – the cow jumping over the moon.
And there were three little bears sitting on chairs
And two little kittens
And a pair of mittens
And a little toy house
And a young mouse
And a comb and a brush and a bowl full of mush
And a quiet old lady who was whispering "hush"
Goodnight room
Goodnight moon
Goodnight cow jumping over the moon
Goodnight light and the red balloon
Goodnight bears
Goodnight chairs
Goodnight kittens
And goodnight mittens
Goodnight clocks
And goodnight socks
Goodnight little house
And goodnight mouse
Goodnight comb
And goodnight brush
Goodnight nobody
Goodnight mush
And goodnight to the old lady whispering "hush"
Goodnight stars
Goodnight air
Goodnight noises everywhere

Title: Chicka Chicka Boom Boom
Author: Bill Martin
A told B and B told C " I’ll meet you at the top of the coconut tree."
"Whee!" said D to E F G "I’ll beat you to the top of the coconut tree."
 "I’ll beat you to the top of the coconut tree."
Chicka chica boom boom!
Will there be enough room?
Here comes H up the coconut tree, and I and J and tag-along K, all on there way up the coconut tree.
Chicka chica boom boom!
Will there be enough room?
Look who’s coming!
L M N O P!
And Q R S!
And T U V!
Still more- W!
And X Y Z!
The whole alphabet up the- Oh, no!
Skit scat skoodle doot.
Flip flop flee.
Everybody’s running to the coconut tree.
Mamas and papas and uncles and aunts hug their little dears, and then dust their pants.
Next from the pileup skinned-knee D and stubbed toe E and patched up F.
Then comes G all out of breath.
H is tangled with I.
j and K are about to cry.
L is knotted like a tie.
M is looped. 
N is stooped.
O is twisted alley-oop.
Skit scat skoodle doot.
Flip flop flee.
Look who’s coming!
It’s black eyed P, Q R S, and loose-tooth T.
Then U V W wiggle-jiggle free.
Last to come X Y Z.
And the sun goes down on the coconut tree. . . 
But- chick chicka boom boom!
Look, there’s a full moon.
A is out of bed, and this is what he said, "Dare double dare, you can’t catch me.
I’ll beat you to he top of the coconut tree."
Chicka chica boom boom!

Title: I’m a Big Sister
Author: Joanna Cole
Someone new is at our house.
Do you know who it is?
It’s our baby!
I’m a big sister now!
The baby is so little.
Too little to walk.
Too little to talk.
Too little to play with toys.
Too little to eat pizza or apples or ice cream.
Babies like to drink milk.
They like to sleep.
They like to be warm and cozy.
Our baby likes to look at me.
"Look at me, baby.
I’m your big sister."
Can I hold our baby?
I must ask Mommy first!
I am gentle with the baby.
I sing a little baby song.
I’m a big sister-I can make our baby warm and cozy.
Sometimes the baby cries.
Daddy says, "Babies cry to tell us something.
Let’s see what’s the matter."
Oh, it’s time to change the baby’s diaper.
It’s time for a bottle, too.
I can help- I’m a big sister now.
Mommy and Daddy show me pictures.
Pictures of me when I was a baby.
I was little, too- just like our baby.
Now I am big!
It’s fun being big.
I can walk.
I can talk.
I can play with toys. 
I can eat pizza and apples and ice cream!
Mommy loves me.
Daddy loves me.
I am special to them.
I’m the only me in the whole world!
I’m special in a new way, too-
I’m a big sister now!

Title: Green Eggs and Ham
Author: Dr. Seuss
I am Sam.
Sam I am.
That Sam-I-am!
That Sam-I-am!
I do not like that Sam-I-am!
Do you like green eggs and ham?
I do not like them Sam-I-am.
I do not like green eggs and ham.
Would you like them here or there?
I would not like them here or there.
I would not like them anywhere. 
I do not like green eggs and ham.
I do not like them Sam-I-am.
Would you like them in a house?
Would you like them with a mouse?
I do not like them in a house.
I do not like them with a mouse.
I do not like them here or there.
I do not like them anywhere.
I do not like green eggs and ham.
I do not like them, Sam-I-am.
Would you eat them in a box?
Would you eat them with a fox?
Not in a box. 
Not with a fox.
Not in a house.
Not with a mouse.
I would not eat them here or there.
I would not eat them anywhere.
I would not eat green eggs and ham.
I do not like them, Sam-I-am.
Would you?
Could you?
In a car?
Eat them!
Eat them!
Here they are.
I would not, could not, in a car.
You may like them.
You will see. 
You may like them in a tree!
I would not, could not, in a tree.
Not in a car! 
You let me be.
I do not like them in a box.
I do not like them with a fox.
I do not like them in a house.
I do not like them with a mouse.
I do not like them here or there.
I do not like them anywhere.
I do not like green eggs and ham. 
I do not like them, Sam-I-am.
A train!
A train!
A train!
A train!
Could you, would you, on a train?
Not on a train!
Not in a tree!
Not in a car!
Sam!
Let me be!
I would not, could not, in a box.
I would not, could not, with a fox.
I will not eat them with a mouse.
I will not eat them in a house.
I will not eat them here or there.
I will not eat them anywhere.
I do not like green eggs and ham.
I do not like them, Sam-I-am.
Say!
In the dark?
Here in the dark?
Would you, could you, in the dark?
I would not, could not in the dark.
Would you, could you, in the rain?
I would not, could not, in the rain.
Not in the dark.
Not on a train.
Not in a car.
Not in a tree.
I do not like them, Sam, you see.
Not in a house. 
Not in a box.
Not with a mouse.
Not with a fox.
I will not eat them here or there.
I do not like them anywhere!
You do not like green eggs and ham?
I do not like them, Sam-I-am.
Could you, would you, with a goat.
I would not, could not, with a goat.
Would you, could you, on a boat?
I could not, would not, on a boat.
I will not, will not, with a goat.
I will not eat them in the rain. 
I will not eat them on a train.
Not in the dark!
Not in a tree!
Not in a car!
You let me be!
I do not like them in a box.
I do not like them with a fox.
I will not eat them in a house.
I will not eat them with a mouse.
I do not like them here or there.
I do not like them ANYWHERE!
I do not like green eggs and ham!
I do not like them, Sam-I-am.
You do not like them.
So you say.
Try them!
Try them!
And you may.
Try them and you may, I say.
Sam!
If you will let me be, I will try them.
You will see.
Say!
I like green eggs and ham!
I do!
I like them, Sam-I-am!
And I would eat them in a boat.
And I would eat them with a goat. . . 
And I will eat them in the rain.
And in the dark.
And on a train.
And in a car.
And in a tree.
They are so good, so good, you see!
So I will eat them in a box.
And I will eat them with a fox.
And I will eat them in a house.
And I will eat them with a mouse.
And I will eat them here and there.
Say!
I will eat them ANYWHERE!
I do so like green eggs and ham!
Thank you!
Thank you, Sam-I-am!

Title: Curious George Takes a Job
Author: H.A. Ray
This is George.
He lived in the Zoo.
He was a good little monkey and always very curious.
He wanted to find out what was going on outside the Zoo.
One day, when the keeper was not paying attention, George got hold of the key for the cage.
When the keeper discovered what had happened, it was too late- George was gone!
WHERE WAS GEORGE?
They looked for him everywhere.
But they could not find him.
George was hiding in the hay of his friend, the elephant.
Finally the keepers gave up looking for him.
George found a nice cozy spot to sleep under the elephant’s right ear, and the next morning, before the zoo opened, he got away safely.
Once on the street George felt a little scared. 
What should he do in the big city?
Maybe he could find his friend, the man with the yellow hat, who had brought him over from Africa a long time ago.
Only George did not know where he lived.
There was a bus stopping at the corner. 
George had never ridden on one.
Quickly he climbed a lamp post, jumped on top of the bus and off they went.
Now they were right at the center of the town.
There was so much to see that George did not know where to look first.
If only he could go on riding this forever!
But after a while George got tired and a little dizzy.
When the bus slowed down to turn into a side street, George jumped off.
There was a restaurant right in front of him.
Mmmm- something smelled good!
Suddenly George felt very hungry.
The kitchen door stood open and George walked in.
On the table was a big pot. 
Of course George was curious.
He had to find out what was in it. . . 
When the cook came back he had a big surprise.
Spaghetti was all over the place and in the middle of it was a little monkey.
George had been eating yards and yards and had wound himself all up in it.
The cook was a kind man and did not scold much. 
But George had to clean up the kitchen and then do all the dishes.
My, what a lot of them there were!
The cook was watching George.
"You are lucky to have four hands, " he said
You can do things twice as quickly.
"I have a friend who could use a handy little fellow like you to wash windows.
If you would like to, I will take you over to him."
So they went down into the subway and took an uptown train to the cook’s friend, who was an elevator man in a skyscraper.
"Sure, I cam use you!" the elevator man said to George.
"I will give you what you need for the job.
You can start right away.
But remember- you are here for washing windows.
Never mind what people inside the house are doing.
Don’t be curious or you’ll get into trouble."
George promised to be good, but little monkeys sometimes forget. . . 
George was ready to start.
My, how many windows there were!
But George got ahead quickly, since he worked with all four hands.
He jumped from window to window just as he had jumped from tree to tree in the African jungle.
For a while George stuck to his work and did not pay any attention to the people inside.
Of course he was curious, but he remembered his promise.
In one room a little boy was crying because he did not want to eat his spinach.
George did not even look but went on with his work.
In another room a man was taking a nap and snoring.
George was sorry it was not his friend, the man with the yellow hat.
He listened to the funny noise for a while, then went on working.
But what was going on here? 
George stopped working and pressed his nose against the window.  
Two painters were working inside.
George was fascinated.
Painting looked like a lot more fun than washing windows!
The painters were ready to go out for lunch.
The minute they left George climbed inside.
What wonderful paints and brushes they had! 
George could not resist. . . 
An hour later the painters came back.
They opened the door- and stood with their mouths wide open.
The whole room had changed to a jungle with palm trees all over the walls and a giraffe and two leopards and a zebra.  
And a little monkey was busy painting himself on one of the trees!
Then the painters knew what had happened!
Luckily George was close to a door.
He ran out as fast as he could. 
After him ran the two painters, then the elevator man and then the woman who lived in the place.
"Oh, my lovely room, my lovely room!" cried the woman.
"Don’t let him her away!"
George headed for the fire escape.
George reached the end of the fire escape.  
The others had not caught up with him yet.
Here was his chance.
They could not jump!
But George could easily jump down and escape.
In a moment he would be safe!
Poor little George!
He had forgotten that the pavement was hard as stone. . .  not like the soft grass of the jungle.
Too bad!
The fall broke his leg and an ambulance came to take George to the hospital.
"He got what he deserved!" said the woman "making my apartment into a jungle, indeed!"
"I told him he would get into trouble," the elevator man added.
"He was too curious."
George had to lie in bed with his leg high up in a plaster cast.
He was very unhappy.
And it had all started out so nicely!
If only he had not been so curious he could have had a lot of fun.
Now it was too late. . . 
But the next morning George’s friend, the man with the big yellow hat, was buying a newspaper. 
Suddenly he got very excited.
"This is George!" he shouted when he saw the picture on the front page.
Quickly he read the whole story and then ran to a telephone booth to ring a hospital.
"I am George’s friend," he said to the nurse who answered the telephone.
"Please take good care of him so that he will get better quickly.
I want to take him to a movie studio and make a picture about his life in the jungle.
Don’t let him get into any more mischief until I can take him away."
Finally the day came when George could walk again.
"Your friend is going to take you away this morning said the nurse.
"Just wait right here for him and don’t touch anything!"
As soon as George was alone he looked around at the strange hospital things.
I wonder what is in that big blue bottle, " he thought.
And this is how the man with the yellow hat found George when he came to call for him!
They picked him up and shook him but they could not wake him up.
He was so fast asleep that finally they had to put him UNDER THE SHOWER!
How surprised his was when he woke up!
George said goodbye to the nurse and the kind doctor,
Then he and the man with the yellow hat got into the car to drive to the movie studio.
In the president’s office George had to sign a contract. 
Now he was a movie actor!
In the studio George was kept so busy all the time that he forgot to be curious,
He liked the jungle they made for him and played happily there.
And when the movie was finally finished George invited all his friends to see it: the doctor and the nurse and the ambulance driver and the man from the newstand and the woman and the elevator man and the two painters and the cook and the reporter and all the keepers of the Zoo.
Now the lights went out and the picture started.
"This is George," the voice began.
"He lived in the jungle.
He was a good little monkey- he had only one fault: he was too curious."
The End.

Title: The Pigeon Finds a Hot Dog!
Author: Mo Willems
Ooooo!
A hot dog!
Yummy!
Yummy!
Yummy!
Aaaaaahhh. . . 
May I help you?
Is that a "hot dog"?
Not a hot dog; my hot dog.
Aaaaaahhh. . . 
I have a question.
I’ve never had a hot dog before. . . . What do they taste like?
Well, they are a taste sensation.
Each morsel is a joy!
A celebration in a bun!
If you’ve never experienced the splendor of a hot dog, you should really. . . wait a second.
This hot dog is mine.
I found it!
Of course!
Enjoy!
Go ahead.
Aaaaaahhh. . . 
Would you say that it tastes like chicken?
Can you believe this guy!?!
What. . .?
It just tastes like a hot dog, okay!?
Okay!
Okay!
So, it doesn’t taste like chicken, then?
Oh, for Pete’s sake!
Hey, I’m a curious bird.
That’s it!
It’s my hot dog, right!?
Mine!
Mine!
Mine!
This is unbelievable!
"Finders, keepers," is what I say!
"I’m a curious bird!"
"What do they taste like?"
"Blah, blah, blah!"
Yeah, right!
I can’t take it anymore!
What am I supposed to do?
I think I’ve got an idea.
You know, you’re pretty smart for a duckling.
Hmmm. . . needs mustard.

Title: Dinosaur Rescue
Author: Penny Dale
Dinosaur train chugging.
Chugging along the track.
Along the track, puffing out smoke.
Chugga!
Chugga!
Chugga!
Stuck dinosaurs calling.
Calling Dinosaur Rescue.
Dinosaur Rescue, please come quickly!
Help!
Help!
Help!
Rescue dinosaurs rushing.
Rushing to get there in time.
To get there in time, before it’s too late!
Wee-ooo!
Wee-ooo!
Wee-ooo!
Police dinosaurs racing.
Racing to warn the train.
The train that is heading for trouble!
Look out!
Look out!
Look out!
Flying dinosaurs
Hovering.
Hovering and swooping down.
Swooping down, ready to land.
Choppa!
Choppa!
Choppa!
Worried dinosaurs waving.
Waving by the track.
By the track to stop the train.
Stop!
Stop!
Stop!
Screech!
Screech!
Screech!
Driver dinosaur braking.
Braking very hard.
Very hard and stopping, just . . . in  . . . time!
Rescue dinosaurs working.
Working together to help everyone.
To help everyone and make everything safe.
Quick!
Quick!
Quick!
Tow-truck dinosaurs lifting.
Lifting and moving the truck.
Lifting the truck and towing it safely away.
Brrm!
Brrm!
Brrm!
Tired dinosaurs getting back.
Back to base, at the end of the day.
Good job, Dinosaur Rescue!
Hooray!
Hooray!
Hooray!
Time to rest.
Time to play . . . and time to get ready for another day.
Snore!
Snore!
Snore!

Title: Duck on a Bike
Author: David Shannon
One day down on the farm, Duck got a wild idea.
"I bet I could ride a bike!" he thought.
He waddled over to where the boy parked his bike, climbed on, and began to ride.
At first he rode very slowly, and he wobbled a lot, but it was fun.
Duck rode past Cow and waved to her.
’Hello, Cow!" said Duck.
"M-o-o-o," said Cow. 
But what she thought was, "A duck on a bike? 
That’s the silliest thing I’ve ever seen!"
Then Duck rode past Sheep.
"Hello, Sheep!" said Duck.
 "B-a-a-a," said Sheep. 
But what she thought was, "He’s going to hurt himself if he’s not careful!"
Duck was riding better now.
He rode past Dog.
"Hello, Dog!" said Duck. 
"Woof!" said Dog. 
But what he thought was, "That is a mighty neat trick!"
Then Duck rode past Cat.
"Hello, Cat!" said Duck.
"Meow," said Cat.
But what she thought was, "I wouldn’t waste my time riding a bike!"
Duck pedaled a little faster.
He rode past Horse.
"Hello, Horse!" said Duck.
"Ne-e-e-igh!" said Horse.
But what he though was, "You’re still not as fast as me, Duck!"
Duck rang his bell as he rode toward chicken.
"Hello, Chicken!" said Duck.
"Cluck! Cluck!" said Chicken. 
But what she thought was, "Watch where you’re going, Duck!"
Then Duck rode past Goat.
"Hello, Goat!" said Duck.
"M-a-a-a," Said Goat. 
But what he thought was, "I’d like to eat that bike!"
Duck stood on the seat and rode past Pig and Pig.
"Hello, Pigs!" said Duck.
"Oink" said Pig and Pig.
But what they thought was, "Duck is such a show-off!"
Then Duck rode no-hands past Mouse.
"Hello, Mouse!" said Duck.
"Squeak," said Mouse. 
But what he thought was, "I wish I could ride a bike just like Duck."
Suddenly, a whole bunch of kids came down the road on bikes.
They were in such a hurry that they didn’t see Duck.
They parked their bikes by the house and went inside.
Now all the animals had bikes!
They rode around and around the barnyard.
"This is fun!" they all said.
"Good idea, Duck!"
Then they put the bikes back by the house. 
And no one knew that on that afternoon, there had been a cow, a sheep, a dog, a cat, a horse, a chicken, a goat, two pigs, a mouse, and a duck on a bike.
The End

Title: Harry the Dirty Dog
Author: Gene Zion
Harry was a white dog with black spots who liked everything, except . . . getting a bath.
So one day when he heard the water running in the tub, he took the scrubbing brush . . . and buried it in the backyard.
Then he ran away from home.
He played where they were fixing the street and got very dirty.
He played at the railroad and got even dirtier.
He played tag with other dogs and became dirtier still.
He slid down a coal chute and got the dirtiest of all.
In fact, he changed from a white dog with black spots to a black dog with white spots.
Although there were many other things to do, Harry began to wonder if his family thought that he had really run away.
He felt tired and hungry too, so without stopping on the way he ran back home.
When Harry got to his house, he crawled through the fence and sat looking at the back door.
One of the family looked out and said, "There’s a strange dog in the backyard . . . by the way, has anyone seen Harry?"
When Harry heard this, he tired very hard to show them he was Harry.
He started to do all his old, clever tricks.
He flip-flopped and he flop-flipped.
He rolled over and played dead.
He danced and he sang.
He did these tricks over and over again, but everyone shook their heads and said, "Oh no, it couldn’t be Harry."
Harry gave up and walked slowly toward the gate, but suddenly he stopped.
He ran to a corner of the garden and started to dog furiously.
Soon he jumped away from the hole barking short, happy barks.
He’s found the scrubbing brush!
And carrying it in his mouth, he ran into the house.
He jumped into the bathtub and sat up begging, with the scrubbing brush in his mouth, a trick he certainly had never done before.
"This little doggie wants a bath!" cried the little girl, and her father said, "Why don’t you and your brother give him one?"
Harry’s bath was the soapiest one he’d ever had.
It worked like magic. 
As soon as the children started to scrub, they began shouting, "Mummy! Daddy! Look, look! Come quick!"
"It’s Harry! It’s Harry! It’s Harry!" they cried.
Harry wagged his tail and was very, very happy.
His family combed and brushed him lovingly, and he became once again a white dog with black spots.
It was wonderful to be home.
After dinner, Harry fell asleep in his favorite place, happily dreaming of how much fun it had been getting dirty.
He slept so soundly, he didn’t even feel the scrubbing brush he’d hidden under his pillow.

Title: How Do Dinosaurs Say Good Night?
Author: Jane Yolen & Mark Teague
How does a dinosaur say good night when Papa comes in to turn off the light?
Does a dinosaur slam his tail and pout?
Does he throw his teddy bear all about?
Does a dinosaur stomp his feet on the floor and shout: "I want to hear one book more!"?
Does a dinosaur roar?
How does a dinosaur say good night when Mama comes in to turn off the light?
Does he swing his neck from side to side?
Does he up and demand a piggyback ride?
Does he mope, does he moan, does he silk, does he sigh?
Does he fall on top of his covers and cry?
No, dinosaurs don’t.
They don’t even try.
They give a big kiss.
They turn out the light.
They tuck in their tails.
They whisper, "Good night!"
They give a big hug, then give one kiss more.
Good night.
Good night, little dinosaur.

Title: Lilly’s Purple Plastic Purse
Author: Kevin Henkes
Lilly loved school.
She loved the pointy pencils.
She loved the squeaky chalk.
And she loved the way her boots went clickety-clickety-click down the long, shiny hallways.
Lilly loved the privacy of her very own desk.
Mine!
She loved the fish sticks and chocolate milk every Friday in the lunchroom.
Straws make everything taste better!
And most of all, she loved her teacher, Mr. Slinger.
For you!
Mr. Slinger was as sharp as a tack.
He wore artistic shirts.
He wore glasses on a chain around his neck.
And he wore a different colored tie for each day of the week.
Listen up!
"Wow," said Lilly. 
That was just about all she could say. 
"Wow."
Instead of "Greetings, students" or "Good morning pupils," Mr. Slinger winked and said, "Howdy!"
He thought that desks in rows were old-fashioned and boring.
"Do you rodents think you can handle a semicircle?"
And he always provided the most tasty snacks-things that were curly and crunchy and cheesy.
"I want to be a teacher when I grow up," said Lilly.
"Me, too!" said her friends Chester and Wilson and Victor.
At home Lilly pretended to be Mr. Slinger.
"I am the teacher," she told her baby brother, Julius. 
"Listen up!"
Lilly even wanted her own set of deluxe picture encyclopedias.
Teachers know everything!
"What’s with Lilly?" asked her mother.
"I thought she wanted to be a surgeon or an ambulance driver or a diva," said her father.
"It must be because of her new teacher, Mr. Slinger," said her mother.
"Wow," said he father.
That was just about all he could say.
"Wow."
Whenever the students had free time, they were permitted to go to the Lightbulb Lab in the back of the classroom.
They expressed their ideas creatively through drawing and writing.
Lilly went often.
She had a lot of ideas.
She drew pictures of Mr. Slinger.
And she wrote stories about him, too.
During Sharing Time, Lilly showed her creations to the entire class.
"Wow," said Mr. Slinger. 
That was just about all he could say. 
"Wow."
Big Friendly Mr. Nice Man Teacher!
And at the very last second Mr. Slinger saved the cold, starving, elderly . . . 
When Mr. Slinger had bus duty, Lilly stood in line even though she didn’t ride the bus.
Lilly raised her hand more than anyone else in class (even if she didn’t know the answer).
Call on me!
Please!
Please!
And she volunteered to stay after school to clap erasers.
"I want to be a teacher when I grow up," said Lilly.
"Excellent choice," said Mr. Slinger.
One Monday morning Lilly came to school especially happy.
She had gone shopping with her Grammy over the weekend.
Lilly had a new pair of movie star sunglasses, complete with glittery diamonds and a chain like Mr. Slinger’s.
She had three shiny quarters.
And, best of all, she had a brand new purple plastic purse that played a jaunty tune when it was opened.
Lilly wanted to show everyone.
"Not now," said Mr. Slinger.
"Listen to our story."
Lilly had a hard time listening.
Lilly really wanted to show everyone.
"Not now," said Mr. Slinger.
"Let’s be considerate of our classmates."
Lilly had a hard time being considerate.
Lilly really, really wanted to show everyone.
"Not now," said Mr. Slinger.
 "Wait until recess or Sharing Time."
But Lilly could not wait.
She’s in trouble.
The glasses were so glittery.
The quarters were so shiny.
And the purse played such nice music, not to mention how excellent it was for storing school supplies.
"Look," Lilly whispered fiercely.
"Look, everyone. 
Look what I’ve got!"
Everyone looked.
Including Mr. Slinger.
He was not amused.
"I’ll just keep your things at my desk until the end of the day," said Mr. Slinger. 
"They’ll be safe there, and then you can take them home."
Lilly’s stomach lurched.
She felt like crying.
Her glasses were gone.
Her quarters wert gone.
Her purple plastic Purse was gone.
Lilly longed for her purse all morning.
She was even too sad to eat the snack Mr. Slinger served before recess.
That afternoon Lilly went to the Lightbulb Lab.
She was still very sad.
She thought and she thought and she thought.
And then she became angry.
She thought and she thought and she thought some more.
And then she became furious.
She thought and she thought and she thought a bit longer.
And then she drew a picture of Mr. Slinger.
Big Fat Mean Mr. Stealing Teacher!
Bad
Claws
Thief
Bad
Wanted By F.B.I.
P.S. I do not want to be a teacher when I grow up!
Right before the last bell rang, Lilly sneaked the drawing into Mr. Slinger’s book bag.
When all the students were buttoned and zipped and snapped and tied and ready to go home, Mr. Slinger strolled over to Lilly and gave her purple plastic purse back.
"It’s a beautiful purse," said Mr. Slinger.
"Your quarters are nice and jingly.
And those glasses are absolutely fabulous.
You may bring them back to school as long as you don’t disturb the rest of the class."
"I do not want to be a teacher when I grow up," Lilly said as she marched out of the classroom.
On the way home Lilly opened her purse.
Her glasses and quarters were inside.
And so was a note from Mr. Slinger.
It said: "Today was a difficult day.
Tomorrow will be better."’
There was also a small bag of tasty snacks at the bottom of the purse.
Lilly’s stomach lurched.
She felt like crying.
She felt simply awful.
Lilly ran all the way home and told her mother and father everything.
Instead of watching her favorite cartoons, Lilly decided to sit in the uncooperative chair.
I’ll stay here a million years for Mr. Slinger.
Why does everything always happen to me?
One thousand fifty-one, one thousand fifty-two, one thousand ninety-nine . . .
That night Lilly drew a new picture of Mr. Slinger and wrote a story about him, too.
Lilly was really really sorry.
So everyone forgave her.
Even her parents.
Even her stinky baby brother.
Even her especially incredible teacher.
And then the sun shined its smiley face down on everyone and everything.
Even the bugs and the worms.
The end
Listen up!!!
I forgive everyone!!!
Kind 
Good 
Nice
Could be principal
I am really really really really really really really sorry!!!
Worms
Bugs
Oops
I’m an author!
How could be resist my no-frills cheese balls?
What does it say?
Lilly’s mother wrote a note.
And Lilly’s father baked some tasty snacks for Lilly to take to school the next day.
"I think Mr. Slinger will understand," said Lilly’s mother.
"I know he will," said Lilly’s father.
The next morning Lilly got to school early.
"These are for you," Lilly said to Mr. Slinger.
"Because I’m really really, really, really, really, really, really, really, really, really, really, really, really, really, really, really, really, really sorry."
Mr. Slinger read the story.
And he looked at the picture.
And he read the note.
What does it say?
And he sampled the snacks.
Yum Yum
"Wow," said Mr. Slinger.
That was just about all he could say. 
"Wow."
"What do you think we should do with this?" asked Mr. Slinger.
"Could we just throw it away?" asked Lilly.
"Excellent idea," said Mr. Slinger.
It’s like having an extra pocket with a radio inside!
Three quarters are even better than a dollar bill because they make noise!
Glamorous protection from harmful rays!
During sharing Time, Lilly demonstrated the many uses and unique qualities of her purple plastic purse, her shiny quarters, and her glittery movie star sunglasses.
Then she did a little performance using them as props.
"It’s called Interpretive Dance," said Lilly.
Mr. Slinger joined in.
"Wow," said the entire crass. 
That was just about all they could say.
"Wow."
Throughout the rest of the day, Lilly’s purse and quarters and sunglasses were tucked safely inside her desk.
She peeked at them often but did not disturb a soul.
Hooray for Mr. Slinger!
Yippee!
No-frills cheese balls!
Delish!
Wow!
Goodies!
Right before the last bell rang, Mr. Slinger served Lilly’s snacks, to everyone’s delight.
"What do you want to be when you grow up?" asked Mr. Slinger.
"A TEACHER!" everyone responded. 
Lilly’s response was the loudest.
"Excellent choice," said Mr. Slinger.
As the pupils filed out of the classroom, Lilly held her purple plastic purse close to her heart.
Mr. Slinger was right- it had been a better day.
Lilly ran and skipped and hopped and flew all the way home, she was so happy.
And she really did want to be a teacher when she grew up.
Accident!
Accident!
Whoo!
Whooooo!
That is, when she didn’t want to be a dancer or a surgeon or an ambulance driver or a diva or a pilot or a hairdresser or a scuba diver . . .
Hold still!
The doctor’s here!
Ready for takeoff!

Title: Llama Llama Red Pajama
Author: Anna Dewdney
Llama llama red pajama reads a story with his mama.
Mama kisses baby’s hair.
Mama Llama goes downstairs.
Llama llama red pajama feels alone without his mama.
Baby Llama wants a drink.
Mama’s at the kitchen sink.
Llama llama red pajama calls down to his llama mama.
Mama says she’ll be up soon.
Baby Llama hums a tune.
Llama llama red pajama waiting waiting for his mama. 
Mama isn’t coming yet.
Baby Llama starts to fret.
Llama llama red pajama whimpers softly for his mama.
Mama Llama hears the phone.
Baby Llama starts to moan. . . .
Llama llama red pajama listens, quiet, for his mama. 
What is Mama Llama doing?
Baby Llama starts boo hoo-ing.
Llama llama red pajama hollers loudly for his mama. 
Baby Llama stomps and pouts.
Baby Llama jumps and shouts.
Llama llama red pajama in the dark without his mama.
Eyes wide open, covers drawn. . . 
What if Mama Llama’s Gone?
Llama llama red pajama weeping, wailing for his mama.
Will his mama ever come?
Mama Llama, RUN RUN RUN!
Baby Llama, what a tizzy!
Sometimes Mama’s very busy.
Please stop all this llama drama and be patient for your mama.
Little Llama don’t you know, Mama Llama loves you so?
Mama Llama’s always near, even if she’s not right here.
Llama llama red pajama gets two kisses from his mama, snuggles pillow soft and deep. . . 
Baby Llama goes to sleep. 

Title: Maisy Goes to the Library
Author: Lucy Cousins
Maisy likes going to the library.
She loves to read a book in a nice, quiet place.
Today, Maisy wanted to read a book about fish.
She found a blue book about birds.
And she found an orange stripy book about tigers, but no fish. 
So Maisy kept looking.
There are lots of other things to do in the library, too.
Use the computer.
Listen to music.
Make copies of your favorite picture.
And look at fish in the aquarium.
Aquarium?
That’s it!
So Maisy looked by the aquarium.
That’s where she found a book about fish.
It was sparkly!
Maisy sat down to read her book in a quiet corner.
Then Cyril and Tallulah came along.
Tallulah made a funny face, and they started laughing!
Then Eddie came in.
"Story time!" he shouted.
Ostrich was going to tell a story in the story corner. . . 
Maisy’s quiet corner!
"There was an old woman who swallowed a fly," Ostrich began.
Charley started laughing.
"She swallowed a dog to catch the cat!" Ostrich read.
Now everyone was laughing!
Woof-woof!
Ha-ha-ha!
Meow!
They were still laughing when they checked out their book and went outside to play.
In the park, Cyril and Charley pretended to be the old woman and her dog. 
Woof-woof!
Tallulah meowed like a cat, and Eddie neighed like a horse.
Meow!
Neigh!
And Maisy read her sparkly book about fish in a nice, quiet place.

Title: Olivia
Author: Ian Falconer
This is Olivia.
She is good at lot of things.
She is very good at wearing people out.
She even wears herself out.
Olivia has a little brother named Ian.
He’s always copying.
Sometimes Ian just won’t leave her alone, so Olivia has to be firm.
Olivia lives with her mother, her father, her brother, her dog, Percy, and Edwin, the cat.
In the morning, after she gets up, and moves the cat, and brushes her teeth, and combs her ears, and moves the cat, Olivia gets dressed.
She has to try on everything.
On sunny days, Olivia likes to go to the beach.
She feels it’s important to come prepared.
Last summer when Olivia was little, her mother showed her how to make sandcastles. 
She got pretty good.
Sometimes Olivia likes to bask in the sun.
When her mother sees that she’s had enough, they go home.
Every day Olivia is supposed to take a nap.
"It’s time for your you-know-what," her mother says.
Of course Olivia’s not at all sleepy.
On rainy days, Olivia likes to go to the museum.
She heads straight for her favorite picture.
Olivia looks at it for a long time.
What could she be thinking?
But there is one painting Olivia just doesn’t get.
"I could do that in about five minutes," she says to her mother.
As soon as she gets home she gives it a try.
Time out.
After a nice bath, and a nice dinner, it’s time for bed.
But of course Olivia’s not at all sleepy.
"Only five books tonight, Mommy," she says.
"No, Olivia, just one."
"How about four?"
"Two."
"Three."
"Oh, all right, three. But that’s it!"
When they’ve finished reading, Olivia’s mother gives her a kiss and says, "You know, you really wear me out. 
But I love you anyway."
And Olivia gives her a kiss back and says, "I love you anyway too."

Title: The Berenstain Bears Forget Their Manners
Author: Stan & Jan Berenstain
There was trouble in the big tree house down a sunny dirt road deep in Bear Country- trouble with manners.
The Bear family’s trouble with manners was that they forgot them!
At first it was just an occasional "please" or "thank you" that was forgotten.
Then there was a rude push without an "excuse me."
Then a reach across the table instead of a "please pass the broccoli."
Mama Bear wasn’t quite sure how or why it happened. 
But she was sure of one thing– whatever the reason, the Bear family had become a pushing, shoving, name-calling, ill-mannered mess!
Sillyhead!
Fuzzbrain!
Noodlepuss!
At the table it was even worse. 
They were a grabbing, mouth-stuffing, food-fighting, kicking-under-the-table super mess!
Of course, Mama Bear tried to correct Brother and Sister Bear’s behavior.
She tried coaxing.
She tried complaining.
She tried shouting!
She tried going to Papa for help (though it sometimes seemed to Mama that he was part of the problem).
Papa banged on the table and shouted as only he could shout.
But nothing really seemed to do any good.
Mama didn’t like what was happening to her family. 
Not one bit. 
Something had to be done. 
But what? 
The best way to fight bad habits, she thought, was with good habits. 
Then she thought of a plan. 
She got a big piece of cardboard and a marker.
At the top she wrote: THE BEAR EAMILY POLITENESS PLAN.
When the plan was finished, she called a family meeting and showed it to papa and the cubs.
It certainly got the Bear family’s attention!
The bear family politeness plan
Rudeness
Penalty
Forgetting "Please" or "thank you" . . . sweep front steps
Pushing or shoving . . . beat two rugs
Interrupting . . . dust downstairs
Name calling . . . clean cellar
Reaching at table . . . clean yard
Playing with food . . . wash dishes
Rude noises . . . weed garden
Banging door . . . clean attic
Forgetting "excuse me" . . . empty garbage
Hogging bathroom . . . put out trash
Mama’s plan had a list of all the rude things she wanted to stop. 
Beside each one was a penalty-a job or chore that went with it. 
If you forgot a "please" or a "thank you," you had to sweep the front steps. 
If you pushed or shoved, you had to beat two rugs. 
If you got caught name-calling, you had to clean the whole cellar!
"But, Mama!" sputtered the cubs. 
"You’re not being fair!"
"It seems to me," she said, "that you’re the ones who aren’t being fair-to yourselves or anyone else. 
That’s what manners are all about-being fair and considerate. 
Manners are very important.
They help us get along with each other.
Why, without manners-"
"Your mama’s absolutely right!" interrupted Papa.
"Thank you, Papa, for your comment. 
But interrupting is number three on the Rude List, and the penalty is dusting the downstairs," Mama said, and handed him the feather duster.
"Hmm," said Brother. 
"This looks serious. 
I think we’d better come up with a plan of our own or we’re going to be doing a lot of extra chores."
"What sort of plan?" asked Sister.
"Well," he said, "instead of just being polite, we’ll be super polite. 
We’ll ’please’ and ’thank you’ so much that Mama will get fed up and call the whole thing off!"
"Yes," said Sister.
"We’ll be so polite, she won’t be able to stand it!"
They put their plan into action. 
They were super polite. . .
-On the stairs:
"After you, Sister dear!"
"Thank you, dear Brother!"
-In the hall:
"Excuse me, Brother dear!"
"Why, certainly, my dear Sister!"
-Waiting for the bathroom:
"Terribly sorry to have kept you waiting!"
"Think nothing of it, my dear!"
But it didn’t work the way they expected.
Mama didn’t get fed up at all. 
And after a while Brother and Sister forgot about being super polite and were just polite. . . 
-At the table:
"Pass the honey, please."
"Certainly."
-In their room:
"Would you like me to help you pick up your toys?"
"Thank you very much."
-in the yard:
"Oops! Sorry-I didn’t mean to bump you."
"That’s all right. 
No harm done."
And it turned out that Mama had been right: things did go more smoothly. 
Once they got into the good manners habit, they didn’t even have to think about it.
But it wasn’t so easy for Papa. 
He was the one who got fed up. 
It’s a little harder to change habits when you’re older, and he had to do quite a few extra chores for forgetting his manners.
"I’m glad to get out of the house, away from that Politeness Plan!" he said as he drove the family along the highway on a trip to the supermarket.
"Manners and courtesy are just as important away from home- especially on the road," said Mama as they stopped at a stop sign to let pedestrians and other cars pass.
"They help us drive safely."
"Well," grumbled Papa as they all went into the busy supermarket, "I think you can have too much of a good thing- you’ve got to have common sense along with manners! 
Why if you let everyone go ahead of you at the checkout, you’d be there forever!
"And sometimes you have to interrupt- Excuse me, mad am," he interrupted a shopper, "but I believe you have a leaking bottle in your cart!" 
The shopper thanked him for his help.
"You see?" he said, driving home.
"There’s more to life than remembering your manners. 
Besides, manners are all right for cubs and mama bears. . . 
". . .  But we papa bears have other things to think about-" 
At that moment the car in front stopped suddenly and Papa bumped into it.
He was furious. 
"Why, that pinheaded fiddlebrain!" he snarled.
"Name calling!" reminded Sister.
The penalty for name calling was cleaning the whole cellar, so Papa gritted his teeth and remembered his manners. 
And a good thing, too. 
Because climbing out of the other car was the biggest, angriest bear he had ever seen!
But when the angry bear saw how polite Papa was, he remembered his manners too. 
He explained that he had stopped short because a mama duck and her ducklings had crossed in front of him. 
Then he and Papa Bear looked at their bumpers and saw that no harm had been done.
"As I was saying," said Papa as they continued on their way, "it’s very important for us to remember our manners at all times- and I want to thank you, Sister, for reminding me to remember mine."
"You’re very welcome, I’m sure," said Sister Bear politely.

Title: This is Not My Hat
Author: Jon Klassen
This hat is not mine.
I just stole it.
I stole it from a big fish.
He was asleep when I did it.
And he probably won’t wake up for along time.
And even if he does wake up, he probably won’t notice that it’s gone.
And even if he does notice that it’s gone, he probably won’t know it was me who took it.
And even if he does guess it was me, he won’t know where I am going.
But I will tell you where I am going. 
I am going where the plants grow big and tall and close together.
It is very hard to see in there.
Nobody will ever find me.
There is someone who saw me already.
But he said he wouldn’t tell anyone which way I went.
So I am not worried about that.
I know it’s wrong to steal a hat.
I know it does not belong to me.
But I am going to keep it.
It was too small for him anyway.
It fits me just right.
And look! 
I made it!
There the plants are big and tall and close together. 
I knew I was going to make it.
Nobody will ever find me.

Title: There’s an Alligator Under My Bed
Author: Mercer Mayer
There used to be an alligator under my bed.
When it was time to go to sleep, I had to be very careful because I knew he was there.
But whenever I looked, he hid. . .  or something.
So I’d call Mom and Dad.
But they never saw it.
It was up to me.
I just had to do something about that alligator.
So I went to the kitchen to get some alligator bait.
I filled a paper bag full of things alligators like to eat.
I put a peanut butter sandwich, some fruit, and the last piece of pie in the garage.
I put cookies down the hall.
I left fresh vegetables on the stairs.
I put a soda and some candy next to my bed.
Then I watched and waited.
Sure enough, out he came to get something to eat.
Then I hid in the hall closet.
I followed him down the stairs.
I followed him down the hall.
When he crawled into the garage, I slammed the door and locked it.
Then I went to bed.
There wasn’t even any mess to clean up.
Now that there is an alligator in the garage, I wonder if my dad will have any trouble getting in his car tomorrow morning.
I’ll just leave him a note.

Title: The Very Hungry Caterpillar
Author: Eric Carle
In the light of the moon a little egg lay on a leaf.
One Sunday morning the warm sun came up and-pop!-out of the egg came a tiny and very hungry caterpillar.
He started to look for some food.
On Monday, he ate through one apple.
But he was still hungry.
On Tuesday he ate through two pears, but he was still hungry.
On Wednesday he ate through three plums, but he was still hungry.
On Thursday he ate through four strawberries, but he was still hungry.
On Friday he ate through five oranges, but he was still hungry.
On Saturday he ate through one piece of chocolate cake, one ice-cream cone, one pickle, one slice of Swiss cheese, one slice of salami, one lollipop, one piece of cherry pie, one sausage, one cupcake and one slice of watermelon.
That night he had a stomachache!
The next day was Sunday again.
The caterpillar ate through one nice green leaf, and after that he felt much better.
Now he wasn’t hungry anymore- and he wasn’t a little caterpillar any more.
He was a big, fat caterpillar.
He built a small house, called a cocoon, around himself.
He stayed inside for more than two weeks.
Then he nibbled a hole in the cocoon, pushed his way out and . . . he was a beautiful butterfly!

Title: Knuffle Bunny
Author: Mo Willems
Not so long ago, before she could even speak words, Trixie went on an errand with her daddy.. . . 
Trixie and her daddy went down the block, through the park, past the school, and into the Laundromat.
Trixie helped her daddy put the laundry into the machine.
She even got to put the money into the machine.
Then they left.
But a block or so later . . . Trixie realized something.
Trixie turned to her daddy and said, Aggle flaggle klabble!
"That’s right," replied her daddy.
"We’re going home."
Aggle flaggle klabble! Said Trixie again.
Blaggle plaggle!
Wumby flappy?!
Snurp.
"Now, please don’t get fussy," said her daddy.
Well, she had no choice . . . . 
She went boneless.
She did everything she could to show how unhappy she was.
By the time they got home, her daddy was unhappy, too.
As soon as Trixie’s mommy opened the door, she asked, "Where’s Knuffle Bunny?"
The whole family ran down the block.
And they ran through the park.
They zoomed past the school, and into the Laundromat.
Trixie’s daddy looked for Knuffle Bunny.
And looked . . .
And looked . . . 
And looked . . . 
But Knuffle Bunny was nowhere to be found.. . . 
So Trixie’s daddy decided to look harder.
Until . . . Knuffle Bunny!!!
And those were the first words Trixie ever said.

Title: Ladybug Girl at the Beach
Author: David Soman and Jacky Davis
"We’re finally here!" declares Lulu as she jumps out of the car and spreads her wings.
"I love the beach!" says Lulu.
"You’ve never even been to the beach before," replied her big brother."
"But I already know that I love it," she says.
"And I can’t wait to go swimming in the waves!"
The sand feels warm under her feet as Lulu and Bingo lead the family to a good spot to spread their blanket.
Lulu runs to the edge of the water.
The ocean goes on and on, and makes huge roaring sounds.
She had no idea it was going to be so big and noisy.
She takes a few steps backward.
Bingo barks at the waves.
"Are you going in?" he brother yells, running past her and splashing into the water.
"I don’t think so," she says.
"Um . . .  I really came here to build sand castles."
Lulu retreats to the beach blanket to find her trusty pail and shovel.
She builds a giant sand castle, and uses little sticks for people.
The King and the Queen are very happy here, she thinks.
Bingo digs a moat to keep them extra safe.
Lulu walks over and sits down next to her mama.
She looks out at the ocean, which is glittering with light.
She thinks it looks pretty from far away.
"Do you want to go into the water?" asks Mama.
"No," Lulu says, "I want to fly the kite now."
Soon the kite is darting back and forth in the wind, but Lulu holds on tight.
After the wind dies down, it feels really hot.
Lulu glances at the ocean.
She thinks the water would be cool, but the waves still look much too big.
This is a good time to remind her parents about ice cream.
Lulu lists all her top eleven favorite flavors: "Chocolate Marshmallow, Cherry Vanilla, Pistachio, Butter Pecan, Peppermint Bon Bon, Peanut Butter Chip, Raspberry Swirl, Peach Pie, Almond Fudge, Royal Banana Surprise, and . . . vanilla."
At the ice cream stand Lulu can’t just choose one.
"This is a day for a double scoop," her mama says.
Sometimes mamas can be very right.
"Come on, Bingo," says Lulu after she finishes her ice cream.
"Let’s take a walk down the beach!"
They find a long piece of driftwood.
Lulu writes Loopy L’s in the sand, and draws pictures of Bingo.
He’s the perfect subject, and stays really still.
It is very hot.
Lulu looks at the ocean.
Other kids are splashing and jumping in the waves.
She walks down to the edge of the water.
"Should we get out feet wet, Bingo?" She asks.
She thinks it would be okay to go into the ocean just a little bit.
Suddenly a wave crashes into her legs and nearly knocks her over.
Just as she gets her balance the whirling water races back and tries to pull her in.
Her feet get buried in the sand up to her ankles.
"Are you okay, Bingo?" Lulu asks.
She looks around to see if anyone notices that they were almost carried away, but everyone is playing just as they were before.
"Let’s be explorers!" says Lulu, brushing the sand off her knees.
"We can collect things for our museum."
They march off across the beach.
They hear seagulls that sound like they are laughing, discover little crabs that burrow into the sand, ad pick up slimy seaweed washed up on the shore.
There are also lots of shells on the beach, all different shapes and sizes.
She chooses the most special one and puts them into her pail.
"I know, Bingo!
I bet if we dig, we could find a pirate treasure!" says Lulu.
She digs, and digs, and digs.
Finding treasure is hard work.
When Lulu feels the water splash against her, she spins around.
The tide has come in!
It is taking away her favorite pail!
She has to rescue it or it will be lost forever!
This is a job for Ladybug Girl!
"I’ll save you!" she says, snapping up the pail.
When she looks down, she realizes she is in the ocean.
She is actually in the ocean!
The water is past her knees, and she isn’t afraid at all!
Ladybug Girl isn’t afraid of anything!"
For the rest of the long afternoon, Ladybug Girl and Bingo splash in the water and run on the beach daring the waves to catch them.
"You can’t get me, waves.
I’m Ladybug Girl!"
Ladybug Girl and Bingo play until the bright blue sky turns pink.
They make footprints in the sand.
At least 14 miles of them, Ladybug Girl thinks.
Every time the ocean erases them, they make more.
Then it is time to go, and Ladybug Girl trudges back across the still-warm sand.
Bingo follows slowly, dragging his ears.
Standing at the top of the dunes, Ladybug Girl waits for her brother.
"So, did you like your first time at the beach?" he asks.
"Yes," she answers.
"I told you, Ladybug Girl loves the beach!"

Title: A Sick Day for Amos McGee
Author: Philip C. Stead
Amos McGee was AN Early RISER. 
Every morning when the alarm clock clanged, he swung his legs out of bed and swapped his pajamas for a fresh-pressed uniform.
He would wind his watch and set a pot of water to boil-saying to the sugar bowl, "A spoonful for my oatmeal, please, and two for my teacup."
Belly full and ready for the workday, he’d amble out the door.
Every day Amos waited for the number five bus.
"Next stop, City Zoo," the bus driver would call.
"6 a.m. right on time," he’d reply.
Amos had a lot to do at the zoo, but he always made time to visit his good friends. 
He would play chess with the elephant (who thought and thought before making a move), run races with the tortoise (who never ever lost), sit quietly with the penguin (who was very shy), lend a handkerchief to the rhinoceros (who always had a runny nose), and, at sunset, read stories to the owl (who was afraid of the dark).
One Day Amos Awoke with the sniffles, and the sneezes, and the chills.
He swung his achy legs out of bed, curled them back again and said, "Ugh.
 I don’t think I’ll be going to work today."
Meanwhile AT THE zoo . . .
The animals waited for their friend.
The elephant arranged his pawns and polished his castles.
The tortoise stretched his legs and limbered up.
The penguin sat patiently, all by himself.
The rhinoceros worried that his allergies were worsening.
The owl perched atop a tall, stack of storybooks, scratching his head with concern.
"Where is Amos?" the animals wondered.
Later that day. . . 
"Hooray! 
My good friends are here!"
The elephant prepared a game of chess. 
Amos thought and thought before making a move.
"I’m too tired to run races today," said Amos to the tortoise. 
"Let’s play hide-and-seek instead."
The tortoise hid inside his shell.
Amos hid beneath the covers.
Amos yawned, "I could use a nap."
The penguin sat quietly, keeping Amos’s feet warm.
"I’m beginning to feel much better, thank you," said Amos to his friends.
He swung his legs out of bed. 
"Perhaps we’ll share a pot of tea."
Amos wound his alarm clock. 
It’s getting late, he said.
"After all, we have a morning bus to catch."
So Amos said goodnight to the elephant.
And goodnight to the tortoise.
And goodnight to the penguin.
And goodnight to the rhinoceros.
And goodnight to the owl, who-knowing that Amos was afraid of the dark-read a story aloud before turning out the light.

Title: Froggy Goes to Bed
Author: Jonathan London
It was late.
Froggy was too pooped to pop.
He’d been playing hard at Max’s all day long.
"FRROOGGYY!" called his mother.
"Whaaat?"
"It’s time for bed!"
"No!" cried Froggy.
"I’m not tired!"
"Why don’t you take a nice bath?" she said.
"We’ll make it a bubble bath."
"Okay," said Froggy. 
"But first I have to find my boat!"
-flop flop flop.
He looked in the fridge.
"Nope!"
He looked beneath the sink.
"Not here!"
He looked in the laundry bin.
"I found it!"
And he took a bath-splash splash splash.
"Now it’s time to Put your pajamas on!" said his mother. 
And she wrapped him all cozy warm in a towel.
"Okay," said Froggy. 
"But first I have to find them!"
-flop flop flop.
He looked on his floor.
"Nope!"
He looked in his toy chest. 
"Not here!"
He looked behind his desk. 
"I found them!"
And he put them on-zwoop.
"FRROOGGYY!" called his mother.
"Whaaaat?"
"It’s time to brush!" said his mother.
"Okay," said Froggy. 
"But first I have to find my toothbrush!"
-flop flop flop.
He looked in the fishbowl.
"Nope!"
He looked in the wastebasket.
"Not here!"
He looked in the cookie jar.
"I found it!"
And he brushed his gums-brush brush brush.
"FRROOGGYY!" called his mother.
"Whaaaat?"
"I bet you want your huggy," said his mother. 
"Yep!" said Froggy.
"I have to find my huggy!"
-flop flop flop.
"Oh, here it is! 
It’s under the stove!" 
Bonk!
He gave it a hug and climbed into bed.
"Now it’s time to sleep!" said his mother, and gave him a good-night kiss.
"Okay," said Froggy.
"But first I need a snack! 
Then I’ll go to sleep."
And he hopped out of bed-flop flop flop.
Munch scrunch munch.
He ate a bowl of flies. . .  then crawled back into bed.
"Now go to sleep, Froggy!" said his mother. 
She was getting a little tired herself.
"Okay," said froggy. 
"But I’m thirsty!
And you have to close the closet!
And open my door just a crack!
And turn the night-light down just how I like it!
Then I’ll go to sleep!"
"Oh fiddlesticks!" said his mother, and got him a glass of water.
"Oops!" cried froggy, looking more red in the face than green.
"It spilled!"
"Oh, Froggy," said his mother.
She wiped it up. . . 
Then got him another glass of water-glug glug glug. 
Closed the closet-slam!
Opened his door just a crack-creeeak.
And turned down the light just right.
"Now go to sleep!" she said.
"Okay," said Froggy. 
"But first . . . 
will you read me a story?"
"Of course, dear." 
She yawned.
And she read. . . 
And she read. . . 
And she read. . . till the book dropped-thump!-and she fell asleep, snoring like a horse.
"Good night, Mom," said Froggy.
Then he closed his eyes and went to sleep-zzzzzzz.
"Good night, Froggy!" said Mr. Owl, sitting on a branch.

Title: Goldilicious
Author: Victoria Kann
I was putting flowers on the mane of my pet unicorn.
"Pinkalicious, why are you dropping flowers on the rug?" asked Mommy.
"I’m not dropping flowers. 
I am getting Goldie ready for the Unicorn Ball," I said, prancing around the room.
"What unicorn? 
I don’t see any unicorn," said Peter.
"She’s right here and she’s not ANY unicorn, she is my unicorn.
Her name is Goldilicious, Goldie for short.
Oh, Goldie-you shouldn’t have done that on the floor!
You know better.
Just neigh when you need to go to the potty.
I’m sorry, Peter, but you are stepping right in it," I said.
"Mommy! 
What is Pinkalicious talking about?" whined Peter.
"Pinkalicious, it’s okay to have an imaginary friend, but maybe it’s time to put Goldie back in her stall or take her outside the house, where she can run free."
"Okay, Mommy. 
Come on, Goldie, we know where we aren’t wanted," I said, galloping out the door.
I took Goldie out to the perfect her pinkerrific pirouette.
Goldie is very graceful and has a wonderful sense of balance.
We were thinking of joining the Majestic Magenta Ballet, but there are only a few extremely special and unique people who can see Goldie, namely, ME!
Goldie is also a pinkatastic roller skater, kite flyer, and high jumper.
She is very fast.
I can never keep up with her.
"Godieeeeeee, wait for me!"
"Goldie, where are you?"
She loves to play hide-and-seek, but she is too quick for me.
As soon as I spot her, she is gone.
"Oh, you turned into a fairy princess and you are having a tea party. 
Goldilicious, this is the most delicious cake I have ever had!
And where did you ever find this sweet flower nectar?" I asked.
"Pinkalicious, may I join your tea party?" Peter asked.
"Please, Peter, you are about to sit on Goldie! 
Be careful," I scolded.
"Here is a little cinnamon stick for your tea," said Peter.
"That is a WORM! Now you have insulted our host. 
You better watch out. . .  because Goldie will always protect me!" I shouted.
"Not if I kidnap her and hold her prisoner in the castle tower!"
"Beware, fair sister, or your golden pet will become broth for my magical cauldron," Peter yelled from the tree house.
"Don’t worry, Goldie, I will rescue you from the Wandering Wizard," I said.
"Pinkalicious, you must gaze into this crystal ball as I cast a spell," Peter chanted as he threw a ball over the side of the tree house.
"Abracadabra, abracadin, wizard out, pirate in!"
Ahoy, matey, Goldilicious will never become your treasure! 
I will make you walk the plank!"
I suddenly realized that Goldilicious was nowhere to be seen.
"Hey, Peter, where did she go?"
"Look, she turned into a mermaid!" Peter pointed to Goldilicious.
"Oh, that is just her dress-up outfit. 
She’s not a real mermaid. 
She is just pretending," I told Peter. 
"Wow, not only can she float on water, she can float in the air. 
Goldilicious is flying!" said Peter.
"Come back!" I screamed.
"Will she come back tomorrow? 
I’m going to find my lasso so I can catch her in the morning when I wake up," said Peter.
"That’s if you can find her," I yelled as Peter ran off. 
"Goldie, where did you go? 
Have you become one with the universe?"
"Pinkalicious, it’s time to go to bed. 
Come in now," bellowed voices from the door.
"Perhaps Goldie is hiding from the mean sorcerers who have come to take me to the dungeon," I said loudly.
"Pinkalicious, we heard that."
"Oh, pardon me, I meant Sir Daddy and Lady Mommy, rulers supreme and gracious guardians of the Princess of Pink."
"NOW!"
"Okay, okay, I’m coming to bed, but I don’t know where Goldie is, and she will miss me if I don’t pet her good night."
"Oh, she was here waiting for me all along!" I said, climbing into bed and closing my eyes.
"Sweet dreams. 
See you tomorrow," Mommy and Daddy said, kissing us both good night.

Title: Maisy Goes Camping
Author: Lucy Cousins
One day, Maisy decided to go camping.
And all her friends came along.
They found the perfect place to make a camp.
Pitching a tent is not easy!
But everyone worked together.
Oh no!
The tent fell down!
So they tried again. . . 
And again. . . 
Until the tent stayed up.
Good job, everyone!
That night, they sang around the campfire.
Then it was time for bed.
Cyril went in first with flashlight.
One in the tent!
Next came Charley. 
Watch the pegs!
Two in the tent!
Then it was Tallulah’s turn.
Three in the tent!
Make room for Maisy!
Four in the tent!
Is there room for one more?
Come on, Eddie!
Oh no!
Five in the. . .  What a squash!
What a squeeze!
What a squeezy squish-squash!
Five in the tent!
Good night campers!
Pop! 
Out came Cyril.
Pop! 
Out came Tallulah.
Pop! 
Out came Charley.
Pop! 
Out came Maisy.
One in the tent, four under the stars.
Sleep tight, campers!
Hoot! Hoot!

Title: Olivia. . . and the Missing Toy
Author: Ian Falconer
One day Olivia was riding a camel in Egypt. . . 
When her mother woke her up.
"Time to get up, sweetie-pie. 
Remember, you have soccer this morning."
Olivia’s uniform comes in a really unattractive green.
"Mommy, can you make me a red soccer shirt like this one? 
Please?"
"But then you’ll look different from everyone else on the team," explained her mother.
"That’s the point."
When Olivia came home from practice, her mother was working on the shirt.
"Is it done yet?" she asked.
"Not yet," said her mother.
Olivia waited, and waited, and waited, till she was too exhausted to wait any longer. 
So she went out to play with the cat.
Look, darling, it’s all done!" said her mother.
But something was missing.
"Wait a second," said Olivia. 
"Where’s my toy?"
"Where’s my toy? 
It was right there on the bed.
I just put it there. 
I remember exactly.
That’s my best toy.
I need it now!
Somebody took my best toy!"
Olivia looked everywhere-under the rug, under the sofa, under the cat.
She asked her little brother, Ian, "WHAT DID YOU DO WITH MY TOY?"
She asked her baby brother, William, "WHAT DID YOU DO WITH MY TOY?"
"Wooshee gaga."
That night, and it was a dark and stormy night, Olivia was practicing her piano when she heard an awful sound.
The sound got louder and louder.
It was HORRIBLE, and it was coming from behind the door.
So, of course, Olivia went inside.
And that’s when she saw it. 
It was. . .  THE DOG!
And he’d chewed her toy to bits.
"Mommy, Daddy, Mommy, Daddy! 
It was Perry!" cried Olivia.
"He took my best toy and chewed it to bits, and now it’s wrecked."
"I’m sorry, sweetie-pie," said her mother, "but doggies like to chew.
And he didn’t know it was your toy."
"My best toy."
"Don’t worry," said Olivia’s father.
"Tomorrow we’ll go get you the very best toy in the whole world."
"Oh, thank you, Daddy. 
I love you more than anyone."
Still, it was Olivia’s best toy. 
So she fixed it, adding a bow for extra beauty.
All better.
"Only books about cats tonight, Mommy."
But even Olivia couldn’t stay mad forever.

Title: Llama llama home with mama
Author: Anna Dewdney 
Llama llama, morning light.
Feeling yucky, just not right. 
Down to breakfast.
Tiny sneeze.
Sniffle, snuffle.
Tissues, please!
Llama’s head is feeling hot.
Llama’s throat is hurting lots. 
Achy, fever, stuffy head. . . 
Llama Llama, back to bed.
Time to rest.
No school today.
Mama Llama brings a tray.
Fruity medicine tastes yucky!
Llama Llama’s throat feels gucky.
Look around. 
Not much to do.
Trucks are boring. 
Tractors, too.
Make a tunnel for a train?
Llama Llama, fuzzy brain.
Mama Llama gets a book.
Have a listen.
Take a look.
Heavy eyelids. 
Drippy nose.
Llama Llama starts to doze.
Up again and feeling better. 
Draw some pictures.
Make some letters.
Llama wants a sandwich, please!
Mama Llama starts to sneeze.
Lunch is over.
Time for toys!
Mama’s head does not like noise.
Mama makes a big ah-choo!
Llama’s out of things to do.
Uh oh! 
Mama’s throat is sore.
Being sick is such a bore.
Mama coughs, and Llama yawns. . . 
How long can this day go on?
Mama shnortles, hacks, and wheezes.
Llama Llama’s sick of sneezes!
Soggy tissues, gobs of guck.
Sniffing, snorting, sneezing, yuck!
Llama llama, red pajama, sick and bored, at home with Mama.
Wait!
Llama llama knows what’s best.
Mama Llama needs a rest!
Get more tissues.
Bring a cup.
Fluff a comfy pillow up.
What else could Mama Llama need?
How about some books to read?
Just the thing for Llama llama, sick at home. . .  
but with his mama.
 
Title: How to Train a Train
Author: Jason Carter Eaton
So you want a pet train?
Well, of course you do!
Trains make awesome pets-they’re fun, playful, and extremely useful.
Lucky for you, this handy guidebook contains everything you need to know to choose, track, and train your very own pet train.
Ready?
Then let’s head out and find some trains!
Different trains live in different places.
Freight trains live in the countryside and travel in herds.
Monorail trains live in the city and travel alone.
Early stream engines pretty much just sit in museums.
Have you decided which sort of train you’d like?
Great.
Now you need to catch one.
There are lots of ways to catch a train.
Some people will corner it.
Others might use a big net to trap it.
Still others will run the track into quicksand.
True, these methods all work.
But I’m going to show you the best way. . . 
First, get up really early in the morning and find a good hiding spot close to some trains.
Now the hard part: sit quietly and wait and wait and wait some more.
As the sun rises, the trains will begin to stir and start their engines.
Watch them work and play.
It’s only natural that you’ll want to take home all the trains but don’t just grab the first one you see.
Take your time and choose one that’s right for you.
Got one?
Time to make your move: send a puff of smoke high into the air.
Perfect!
You’ve got the train’s attention!
If you brought any coal with you, now would be the time to offer it.
Try saying, "My what a handsome train you are."
Next, make the call of the wild train: CHUGGA-CHUGGA, CHUGGA-CHUGGA!
CHOO-CHOO!
Well done!
Here it comes!
How will you know if the train you caught is THE ONE?
Don’t worry.
You’ll know.
Once you get your train home, you’ll want to give it a name.
Some popular names are: Milo, Morgan, Nathan, Pushkin, Smokey, Picklepuss, Captain Foofamaloo, Little miss Muffinhead, Sir Chuggsa, and Sparkles.
Of course, you can name your train whatever you like.
Don’t worry if it seems shy or scared at first.
A train needs time to adjust to new surroundings.
A warm bath can help calm a nervous train. . .  and few trains can resist a good read-aloud.
If your train has trouble falling asleep at night, play soft locomotion sounds: Rocka-rocka, clickety-clack! 
Rocka-rocka, clickety-clack!
That’s an old conductor’s trick that’ll give a train good dreams.
Spend as much time as you can getting to know your train.
Does it prefer going fast or slow?
Does it like to fetch.
How does it feel about tunnels and bridges?
Want to teach your train a few tricks?
Easy as pie!
Start with a simple trick. . .  then move on to something a bit harder.
By now your train should trust you enough to let you ride him. . .  but he may not trust you enough to ride in the engineer’s car yet.
Start off in the caboose.
Good manners are important.
Train your train not to leap up on people and to always wipe its wheels before going indoors.
Of course, your train can’t go everywhere with you.
Out on the open road, you’re sure to pass other kids with their pet trains, planes, trucks, or submarines.
This is a great chance for both of you to make new friends.
Congratulations!
You’ve given your train fuel, water, a good home, plenty of friendship, and fun- everything it needs to be happy.
How will you know if your train is happy?
Don’t worry.
You’ll know.

Title: Pete the Cat: The Wheels on the Bus
Author: James Dean
The wheels on the bus go round and round, round and round, round and round.
The wheels on the bus go round and round all day long.
The horn on the bus goes beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep, beep.
The horn on the bus goes beep, beep, beep all day long.
The wipers on the bus go swish, swish, swish, swish, swish, swish, swish, swish, swish, swish.
The wipers on the bus go swish, swish, swish all day long.
The signals on the bus go blink, blink, blink, blink, blink, blink, blink, blink, blink.
The signals on the bus go blink, blink, blink, blink all day long.
The motor on the bus goes zoom, zoom, zoom, zoom, zoom, zoom, zoom, zoom, zoom.
The motor on the bus goes zoom, zoom, zoom all day long.
The door on the bus goes open and shut, open and shut, open and shut.
The door on the bus goes open and shut all day long.
The kitties on the bus say, "Come on, Pete! Come on, Pete! Come on, Pete!"
The kitties on the bus say, "Come on, Pete!" all day long.
The driver on the bus says, "Move on back! Move on back! Move on back!"
The driver on the bus says, "Move on back!" all day long.
Pete’s friends on the bus say, "Sit with us! Sit with us! Sit with us!"
Pete’s friends on the bus say, "Sit with us!" all day long.
The back of the bus bumps up and down, up and down, up and down.
The back of the bus bumps up and down all day long.
The kitties on the bus go Pete the Cat, Pete the Cat, Pete the Cat.
The kitties on the bus go Pete the Cat all day long.
The dog on the bus goes woof woof woof, woof woof woof, woof woof woof.
The dog on the bus goes woof woof woof all day long.
The cats on the bus shout, "Let’s rock out! Let’s rock out! Let’s rock out!"
The cats on the bus shout, "Let’s rock out!" all day long.
The wheels on the bus go round and round, round and round, round and round.
The wheels on the bus go round and round all day long.
All day long.
All day long.

Title: Charlie and the New Baby
Author: Ree Drummond
Well, howdy!
Charlie the Ranch Dog here.
You can just call me Charlie.
Life sure is good out here on the ol’ ranch.
The sun is shining, the kids are playing, the birds are chirping, the cattle are happy. . . 
. . . And Mama is rubbing my belly.
I love it when Mama rubs my belly.
Ahhh. . .  Life doesn’t get any better than this.
It’s good to be the King of the Ranch!
Snort-HUH?
What’d I miss?
Where are the kids?
Where’s Mama?
Wait, what’s that?
They’re carrying a calf!
What’s going on?
What are they doing?
Wait. . .  they’re taking the calf. . .  in the House?!?
But everyone knows calves don’t belong in the house!
I’d better go investigate.
I have now officially seen everything.
Well, this calf does look brand-new. 
She must be a brand-new baby.
Maybe she’s lonely.
Maybe she has lost her mama.
Maybe she needs a little tender loving care.
Mama and the kids are perfect for that job!
They give me tender loving care all the time!
They scratch my ears. . . .
They feed me lunch. . . 
(Lunch is my life.)
They spend time with me. . .  and they tuck me into bed at night.
Yep, it’s all TLC, all the time for me. . . .
Hey!
That’s my blanket!
I’ve always loved that blanket.
Now they’re giving the calf. . .  a bath?
Hmm.
It’s been awhile since I’ve had one of those.
Wait, where’s Mama going?
Maybe she’s making me dinner!
Yum.
Dinner is my life.
Wait.
What?
HUH?!?
Hark.
Do you hear that sound?
That’s the sound of my stomach growling.
I haven’t eaten in a long, long time.
At least an hour!
I’m so hungry, I could faint.
Hey!
Now they’re tucking her in.
In My bed!
That’s exactly how they tuck me in!
Boy, that soft bed of mine sure does look comfy.
Is it bedtime already?
But what about my bed?
What?
I have to sleep on the floor?
Oh, no.
Say it ain’t so.
Oh, well.
Nothing really left to do but get some shut-eye, I guess.
Maybe I’ll dream about a happier time long, long ago.
A time when a dog could lie on his bed.
A time when a dog could get a bath and a belly rub from time to time.
A time before this silly ol’ calf ever showed up.
A time when. . . 
When. . . 
Zzzzzzzzz. . . 
Snort-HUH?!?
Ahh.
Now this is more like it!
Don’t worry everyone.
There’s plenty of me to go around.
And looks like there’s enough tender loving care around here for everyone.
Even Abigail!

Title: Bear Wants More
Author: Karma Wilson
When springtime comes, in his warm winter den a bear wakes up very hungry and thin!
He waddles outside and roots all around.
He digs and he paws fresh shoots from the ground.
He nibbles on his lawn till the last blade is gone.
But the bear wants more!
Mouse scampers by with his acorn pail.
"Come along," Mouse squeaks, "to Strawberry Vale!"
So up Mouse hops onto Bear’s big back.
They tromp through the woods for a fresh fruit snack.
The berries grow sweet, and they eat, eat, EAT!
But the bear wants more!
The noon sun glows, when along hops Hare.
"Good day, friend Mouse! How do, friend Bear?"
"I’m HUNGRY!" roars Bear.
Hare says, "Follow me! There’s a fresh clover patch by the cottonwood tree."
They nibble on their lunch, with a crunch, crunch, crunch!
But the bear wants more!
Badger shuffles by with his new fishin’ pole.
"There’s a fine fish feast at the o1’ fishin’ hole."
They head to the pond and they sit by the shore.
Bear catches fish, . . .  but he still wants more!
Meanwhile. . .  back at the big bear’s den wait Gopher and Mole with Raven and Wren.
They bake honey cakes.
They decorate the lair.
It’s a springtime party for their good friend Bear!
Bear rubs at his tummy.
He smells something YUMMY. . . 
And he still wants more!
Bear sniffs and he snuffles as a sweet breeze blows.
He romps to his home.
He follows his nose.
His friends yell "SURPRISE!" when he gets to his den.
But Bear is SO big. . .  that he can’t fit in!
Bear wails, "What luck! I am STUCK, STUCK, STUCK. . .  in my own front door!"
Mouse squeaks, "Poor Bear. 
He is wedged too tight."
Hare tugs, Raven Pushes with all of their might.
Badger gets a stick and he pries SO hard. . .  that Bear POPS out and he lands in his yard!
Since Bear is SO WIDE, they party outside.
And he still wants more!
Bear opens presents; he gobbles honey cakes.
He eats SO much that his big tummy aches.
He snuggles in the grass and he snores big snores.
He is full, full, full. . .  but. . .  his friends want more!

Title: Chicka Chicka 1-2-3
Author: Bill Martin Jr
1 told 2 and 2 told 3, "I’ll race you to the top of the apple tree."
Here comes 9 to the apple tree.
Next comes 10 and then 11.
"Wow, these apples taste like heaven!"
"Chicka Chicka 1,2,3. . . 
Will there be a place for me?"
16’s next to make the scene, climbing branches with 17.
18, 19, one more’s 20.
Numbers, numbers, there are plenty.
"Chicka Chicka 1, 2, 3. . .  
Will there be a place for me?"
Curvy 30, flat-foot 40 climbing up to join the party!
50’s fine and 60’s dandy.
70’s hair is long and sandy.
"Chicka Chicka 1, 2, 3. . .  
Will there be a place for me?"
"Let’s climb more," says treetop 80, higher and higher, up to 90, until at last there’s 99, and all the numbers are feeling fine, except for 0, who begins to cry.
"Chicka Chicka 1,2,3 . . . 
Will there be a place for me?"
Oh, no!
Buzzing close!
Bumblebees!
0 hides behind the tree.
"GET OUT OF OURTREE!" the bumblebees shout, and all the numbers tumble out.
90, 80, 70 fall, hit the ground in a free-for-all.
60, 50, 40 run.
No more climbing, no more fun!
30 next, then sweet little 20.
Numbers, numbers, no longer plenty!
19 and 18, my, oh my!
Frightened numbers jump and fly!
17, 16, 15 more.
Now 14 has hit the floor.
And 13, too-unlucky guy!
12 had almost touched the sky!
Bent-up 11.
(Wait! Where’s 10?)
9,8,7 follow then.
Twisted 6 and top-hat 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, take a dive!
"Chicka Chicka 1, 2,3. . .  Now I know the place for me!"
0 lands on top of the tree, joins with 10.
Now 100 you see!
"Chicka Chicka 1,2,3. . .  
Here’s the place that’s just for me!"
All the numbers come back out, higher and higher, as they shout . . .
"Chicka, Chicka 1,2,3! 
0’s hero of the number tree!"

Title: Clifford at the Circus
Author: Norman Bridwell
I’m Emily Elizabeth, and I have a dog named Clifford.
We saw a sign that said the circus was in town.
A smaller sign said the circus needed help.
We always wanted to join a circus.
We ran there as fast as Clifford could run.
The owner said everything was going wrong.
He didn’t think they could put on the show.
I told him Clifford and I would help him.
He didn’t think a girl and her dog could be much help.
But I said, "The show must go on."
The first problem was the lions and tigers.
They wouldn’t obey the animal trainer.
Clifford gave them a command.
They listened to Clifford.
After that the animal trainer didn’t have to worry anymore.
Some clowns had quit the circus.
The other clowns needed help with their act.
I was sure Clifford could help.
Clifford tried on some costumes.
He found one he liked and joined the act.
Clifford enjoyed being a clown.
He wagged his tail.
That made the act even better.
The tightrope walker had a sprained ankle.
Clifford tried to walk the tightrope.
He was pretty good.
It wasn’t his fault that he couldn’t get off the ground.
Before the next act we walked out on the midway.
Clifford loves cotton candy. 
He sniffed it.
He sniffed a little too hard.
Licking the cotton candy off his nose made him thirsty. 
He took a drink.
The circus man tried to stop him.
It was too late.
Clifford had spoiled the high diver’s act.
But he didn’t spoil the high diver.
Whew, that was close.
The second half of the circus began with the elephants on parade.
The biggest elephant had a cold in its nose and couldn’t lead the parade.
So Clifford slipped into an elephant suit and gave them a hand. 
I mean a tail.
The next act was the human cannon ball.
She didn’t have any gunpowder for her cannon.
So Clifford helped her out.
He helped her right out of the tent.
Then came the grand finale.
I was going up in a balloon with the circus man.
Everyone came out to watch.
Oh dear, the rope broke. 
I didn’t worry.
I knew Clifford would save us.
He rushed to the rescue.
But he missed the rope.
We were blowing away.
Things looked bad.
Clifford didn’t give up.
He grabbed an extra tent pole.
He used some telephone wire and took aim.
Bull’s-eye!
The balloon was falling like a rock.
We were scared silly.
But Clifford got there in time.
Good old Clifford.
Everybody said it was the most exciting end a circus ever had.
Clifford saved the show, and me.

Title: The Cat in The Hat
Author: Dr. Seuss
The sun did not shine.
It was too wet to play.
So we sat in the house all that cold, cold, wet day.
I sat there with sally.
We sat there, we two.
And i said, "how i wish we had something to do!"
Too wet to go out and too cold to play ball.
So we sat in the house.
We did nothing at all.
So all we could do was to sit!
Sit!
Sit!
Sit!
And we did not like it.
Not one little bit.
And then something went bump!
How that bump made us jump!
We looked!
Then we saw him step in on the mat!
We looked!
And we saw him!
The cat in the hat!
And he said to us, "why do you sit there like that?"
"i know it is wet and the sun is not sunny. 
But we can have lots of good fun that is funny!"
"i know some good games we could play," said the cat.
"i know some new tricks," said the cat in the hat.
"a lot of good tricks. 
I will show them to you. 
Your mother will not mind at all if i do."
Then sally and i did not know what to say.
Our mother was out of the house for the day.
But our fish said, "no! No! 
Make that cat go away! 
Tell that cat in the hat you do not want to play.
He should not be here.
He should not be about.
He should not be here when your mother is out!"
"now! Now! Have no fear. 
Have no fear!" said the cat.
"my tricks are not bad," said the cat in the hat.
"Why, we can have lots of good fun, if you wish, with a game that I call up-up-up with a fish!"
"Put me down!" said the fish.
"This is no fun at all!
Put me down!" said the fish.
"I do not wish to fall!"
"Have no fear!" said the cat.
"I will not let you fall.
I will hold you up high As I stand on a ball.
With a book on one hand!
And a cup on my hat!
But that is not ALL I can do!" Said the cat . . .
"Look at me!
Look at me now!" said the cat.
"With a cup and a cake On the top of my hat!
I can hold up two books!
I can hold up the fish!
And a little toy ship!
And some milk on a dish!
And look!
I can hop up and down on the ball!
But that is not all!
Oh, no.
That is not all . . .
"Look at me!
Look at me!
Look at me Now!
It is fun to have fun But you have to know how.
I can hold up the cup And the milk and the cake!
I can hold up these books!
And the fish on a rake!
I can hold the toy ship And a little toy man!
And look! 
With my tail I can hold a red fan!
I can fan with the fan as I hop on the ball!
But that is not all.
Oh, no.
That is not all. . . ."
That is what the cat said . . .
Then he fell on his head!
He came down with a bump from up there on the ball.
And Sally and I, We saw all the things fall!
And our fish came down, too.
He fell into a pot!
He said, "Do I like this? 
Oh, no! 
I do not.
This is not a good game," Said our fish as he lit.
"No, I do not like it, Not one little bit!"
"Now look what you did!" Said the fish to the cat.
"Now look at this house!
Look at this! 
Look at that!
You sank our toy ship, Sank it deep in the cake.
You shook up our house and you bent our new rake.
You should not be here when our mother is not.
You get out of this house!" Said the fish in the pot.
"But I like to be here.
Oh, I like it a lot!" Said the Cat in the Hat To the fish in the pot.
"I will not go away.
I do not wish to go!
And so," said the Cat in the Hat, "So so so. . .  I will show you another good game that I know!"
And then he ran out.
And, then, fast as a fox, The Cat in the Hat Came back in with a box.
A big red wood box.
It was shut with a hook.
"Now look at this trick," Said the cat.
"Take a look!"
Then he got up on top With a tip of his hat.
"I call this game FUN-IN-A-box," Said the cat.
"In this box are two things I will show to you now.
You will like these two things," Said the cat with a bow.
" I will pick up the hook.
You will see something new.
Two things. 
And I call them Thing One and thing Two.
These things will not bite you.
They want to have fun."
Then, out of the box Came Thing Two and Thing One!
And they ran to us fast.
They said, "How do you do?
Would you like to shake hands With Thing One and Thing Two?"
And Sally and I Did not know what to do.
So we had to shake hands With Thing One and Thing Two.
We shook their two hands.
But our fish said, "No! No! 
Those Things should not be in this house! 
Make them go!"
"They should not be here when your mother is not!
Put them out!
Put them out!" said the fish in the pot.
"Have no fear, little fish," Said the Cat in the Hat.
"These Things are good Things."
And he gave them a pat.
"They are tame. 
Oh, so tame!
They have come here to play.
They will give you some fun on this wet, wet, wet day."
"Now, here is a game that they like," Said the cat.
"They like to fly kites," Said the Cat in the Hat.
"No! 
Not in the house!" said the fish in the pot.
"They should not fly kites in a house! 
They should not.
Oh, the things they will bump!
Oh, the things they will hit!
Oh, I do not like it!
Not one little bit!"
Then Sally and I Saw them run down the hall.
We saw those two Things Bump their kites on the wall!
Bump! 
Thump! 
Thump! 
Bump!
Down the wall in the hall.
Thing two and thing one!
They ran up!
They ran down!
On the string of one kite we saw mother’s new gown!
Her gown with the dots that are pink, white and red.
Then we saw one kite bump on the head of her bed.
Then those Things ran about with big bumps, jumps and kicks and with hops and big thumps and all kinds of bad tricks.
And I said, "I do not like the way that they play!
If Mother could see this, Oh, what would she say!"
Then our fish said, "Look! Look!"
And our fish shook with fear.
"Your mother is on her way home!
Do you hear?
Oh, what will she do to us?
What will she say?
Oh, she will not like it to find us this way!"
"So, Do something! Fast!" said the fish.
"Do you hear!
I saw her. 
Your mother!
Your mother is near!
So, as fast as you can, think of something to do!
You will have to get rid of Thing One and Thing Two!"
So, as fast as I could, I went after my net.
And I said, "With my net I can get them I bet.
I bet, with my net, I can get those Things yet!"
Then I let down my net.
It came down with a PLOP!
And I had them!
At last!
Those two things had to stop.
Then I said to the cat, "Now you do as I say. 
You pack up those things and you take them away!"
"Oh dear!" said that cat.
"You did not like our game. . .  
Oh dear.
What a shame!
What a shame!
What a shame!"
Then he shut up the Things In the box with the hook.
And the cat went away with a sad kind of look.
"That is good," said the fish.
"He has gone away. 
Yes.
But your mother will come.
She will find this big mess!
And this mess is so big and so deep and so tall, We can not Pick it up.
There is no way at all!"
And THEN!
Who was back in the house?
Why, the cat!
"Have no fear of this mess," said the Cat in the Hat.
"I always pick up all my playthings and so. . . 
I will show you another Good trick that I know!"
Then we saw him pick up all the things that were down.
He picked up the cake, And the rake, and the gown, And the milk, and the strings, And the books, and the dish, And the fan, and the cup, and the ship, and the fish.
And he put them away.
Then he said, "That is that."
And then he was gone with a tip of his hat.
Then our mother came in and she said to us two, "Did you have any fun? 
Tell me. 
What did you do?"
And Sally and I did not know what to say.
Should we tell her the things that went on there that day?
Should we tell her about it?
Now, what should we do?
Well. . .  What would you do if your mother asked you?

Title: The Duckling gets a cookie!?
Author: Mo Willems
Hello!
Scooty scoot scoot!
May I have a cookie, please?
Oh!
Thanks!
Flappy Flip Flap!
That was very nice of you!
Oh!
Look at all those nuts.
Hey!
How did you get that cookie!?
I asked for it.
You asked for it. . . .
Politely.
Say, does that cookie have nuts?
Yes.
So, you got a cookie with nuts just by asking!?
Politely.
I ask for things all the time!
I ask to drive the bus!
I ask for hot dog parties!
Do I ask for candy?
I do.
It doesn’t have to be a big bus y’know. . . .
I’ll ask for a "French Fry Robot" every now and then.
I’ve asked for a walrus!
Right now, I’m asking, "Why?"
Why?
Why?
Why?
Ohhhh. . .  there’s more!
Sometimes I ask for a hug.
Or I’ll ask for one more story!
I can’t count the times I’ve asked for my own personal iceberg.
I ask to stay up late!
Oh yeah, I’m the asking-est pigeon in town!
But do I get what I ask for?
No!
It’s not fair.
Ducklings get everything!
Pigeons like cookies, too!
(Especially with nuts.)
Why did you get that cookie!?!
So I could give it to you.
And another thing-Hubba-Whaa?!?
You’re giving me that cookie?
With the nuts.
That is so. . .  nice!
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Mmmm. . . ! 
Chomp!
That is one cool duckling.
Chomp!
Yes, sir!
Bye!
May I have another cookie, please?
But this time, no nuts.

Title: The Grouchy Ladybug
Author: Eric Carle
It was night and some fireflies danced around the moon.
At five o’clock in the morning the sun came up.
A friendly ladybug flew in from the left. 
It saw a leaf with many aphids on it, and decided to have them for breakfast.
But just then a grouchy ladybug flew in from the right.
It too saw the aphids and wanted them for breakfast.
"Good morning," said the friendly ladybug.
"Go away!" shouted the grouchy ladybug. 
"I want those aphids."
"We can share them," suggested the friendly ladybug.
"No. 
They’re mine, all mine," screamed the grouchy ladybug.
"Or do you want to fight me for them?"
"If you insist," answered the friendly ladybug sweetly.
It looked the other bug straight in the eye.
The grouchy ladybug stepped back.
It looked less sure of itself.
"Oh, you’re not big enough for me to fight," it said.
"Then why don’t you pick on somebody bigger?"
"I’ll do that!" screeched the grouchy ladybug.
"I’ll show you!" 
It puffed itself up and flew off. 
At six o’clock it met a yellow jacket.
"Hey you," said the grouchy ladybug.
"Want to fight?"
"If you insist," said the yellow jacket, showing its stinger.
"Oh, you’re not big enough," said the grouchy ladybug and flew off.
At seven o’clock it met a stag beetle.
"Hey you," said the grouchy ladybug.
"Want to fight?"
"If you insist," said the stag beetle, opening its jaws.
"Oh, you’re not big enough," said the grouchy ladybug and flew off.
At eight o’clock it came across a praying mantis.
"Hey you," said the grouchy ladybug.
"Want to fight?"
"If you insist," said the praying mantis, reaching out with its long front legs.
"Oh, you’re not big enough," said the grouchy ladybug and flew off.
At nine o’clock it almost flew into a sparrow.
"Hey you," said the grouchy ladybug.
"Want to fight?"
"If you insist," said the sparrow, opening its sharp beak.
"Oh, you’re not big enough," said the grouchy ladybug and flew off.
At ten o’clock it saw a lobster.
"Hey you," said the grouchy ladybug.
"Want to fight?"
"If you insist," said the lobster, stretching its claws.
"Oh, you’re not big enough," said the grouchy ladybug and flew off.
At eleven o’clock it bumped into a skunk.
"Hey you," said the grouchy ladybug.
"Want to fight?"
"If you insist," said the skunk, starting to lift its tail.
"Oh, you’re not big enough," said the grouchy ladybug and flew off.
At twelve noon it spotted a boa constrictor.
"Hey you," said the grouchy ladybug.
"Want to fight?"
"If you insis-s-s-t," said the snake, "right after lunch."
"Oh, you’re not big enough," said the grouchy ladybug and flew off.
At one o’clock it happened upon a hyena.
"Hey you," said the grouchy ladybug.
"Want to fight?"
"If you insist," said the hyena, laughing eerily and showing its teeth.
"Oh, you’re not big enough," said the grouchy ladybug and flew off.
At two o’clock it met a gorilla.
"Hey you," said the grouchy ladybug.
"Want to fight?"
"If you insist," said the gorilla, beating its chest.
"Oh, you’re not big enough," said the grouchy ladybug and flew off.
At three o’clock it ran into a rhinoceros.
"Hey you," said the grouchy ladybug.
"Want to fight?"
"If you insist," said the rhinoceros, lowering its horn.
"Oh, you’re not big enough," said the grouchy ladybug and flew off.
At four o’clock it encountered an elephant.
"Hey you," said the grouchy ladybug.
"Want to fight?"
"If you insist," said the elephant, raising its trunk and showing its big tusks.
"Oh, you’re not big enough," said the grouchy ladybug and flew off.
At five o’clock it met a whale.
"Hey you," said the grouchy ladybug.
"Want to fight?"
But the whale did not answer at all.
"You’re not big enough anyway," said the grouchy ladybug and flew off.
At five fifteen the grouchy ladybug said to one of the whale’s flippers "Hey you, want to fight?"
But it got no answer.
So it flew on.
At five thirty the grouchy ladybug said to the whale’s fin, "Hey you, want to fight?"
But it got no answer.
So it flew on.
At a quarter to six the grouchy ladybug said to the whale’s tail, "Hey you, want to fight?"
And the whale’s tail gave the grouchy ladybug such a SLAP. . .  that it flew across the sea and across the land. 
At six o’clock the grouchy ladybug arrived right back where it had started from.
"Ah, here you are again," said the friendly ladybug. 
"You must be hungry.
There are still some aphids left. 
You can have them for dinner."
"Oh, thank you," said the wet, tired, and hungry ladybug
Soon all the aphids were gone.
"Thank you," said the leaf.
"You are welcome," answered both ladybugs, and they went to sleep.
The fireflies, who had been sleeping all day, came out to dance around the moon. 

Title: The True Story of the 3 little pigs!
Author: Jon Scieszka 
Everybody knows the story of the Three Little Pigs.
Or at least they think they do.
But I’ll let you in on a little secret.
Nobody knows the real story because nobody has ever heard my side of the story.
I’m the wolf. 
Alexander T Wolf.
You can call me Al.
I don’t know how this whole Big Bad wolf thing got started, but it’s all wrong.
Maybe it’s because of our diet.
Hey, it’s not my fault wolves eat cute little animals like bunnies and sheep and pigs.
That’s just the way we are. 
If cheeseburgers were cute, folks would probably think you were Big and Bad, too.
But like I was saying, the whole Big Bad Wolf thing is all wrong.
The real story is about a sneeze and a cup of sugar.
Way back in Once Upon a Time time, I was making a birthday cake for my dear old granny.
I had a terrible sneezing cold.
I ran out of sugar.
So I walked down the street to ask my neighbor for a cup of sugar.
Now this neighbor was a pig.
And he wasn’t too bright either.
He had built his whole house out of straw.
Can you believe it?
I mean who in his right mind would build a house of straw?
So of course the minute I knocked on the door, it fell right in.  
I didn’t want to just walk into someone else’s house. 
So I called, "Little Pig, Little Pig, are you in?" 
No answer.
I was just about to go home without the cup of sugar for my dear old granny’s birthday cake.
That’s when my nose started to itch.
I felt a sneeze coming on.
Well I huffed.
And I snuffed.
And I sneezed a great sneeze.
And you know what? 
That whore darn straw house fell down. 
And right in the middle of the pile of straw was the First Little Pig-dead as a doornail.
He had been home the whole time.
It seemed like a shame to leave a perfectly good ham dinner lying there in the straw. 
So I ate it up.
Think of it as a big cheeseburger just lying there.
I was feeling a little better. 
But I still didn’t have my cup of sugar.
So I went to the next neighbor’s house.
This neighbor was the First Little pig’s brother.
He was a little smarter, but not much.
He had built his house of sticks.
I rang the bell on the stick house.
Nobody answered.
I called, "Mr. Pig, Mr. Pig, are you in?"
He yelled back, "Go away wolf. 
You can’t come in. 
I’m shaving the hairs on my chinny chin chin."
I had just grabbed the doorknob when I felt another sneeze coming on.
I huffed. 
And I snuffed. 
And I tried to cover my mouth, but I sneezed a great sneeze.
And you’re not going to believe it, but this guy’s house fell down just like his brother’s.
When the dust cleared, there was the Second Little Pig-dead as a doornail. 
Wolf’s honor.
Now you know food will spoil if you just leave it out in the open.
So I did the only thing there was to do.
I had dinner again.
Think of it as a second helping.
I was getting awfully full.
But my cold was feeling a little better.
And I still didn’t have that cup of sugar for my dear old granny’s birthday cake.
So I went to the next house.
This guy was the First and Second Little Pigs’ brother.
He must have been the brains of the family.
He had built his house of bricks.
I knocked on the brick house. 
No answer.
I called, "Mr. Pig, Mr. Pig, are you in?"
And do you know what that rude little porker answered?
"Get out of here, Wolf. 
Don’t bother me again."
Talk about impolite!
He probably had a whole sackful of sugar.
And he wouldn’t give me even one little cup for my dear sweet old granny’s birthday cake.
What a pig!
I was just about to go home and maybe make a nice birthday card instead of a cake, when I felt my cold coming on.
I huffed.
And I snuffed.
And I sneezed once again.
Then the Third little pig yelled, "And your old granny can sit on a pin!"
Now I’m usually a pretty calm fellow.
But when somebody talks about my granny like that, I go a little crazy.
When the cops drove up, of course I was trying to break down this Pig’s door. 
And the whole time I was huffing and puffing and sneezing and making a real scene.
The rest, as they say, is history.
The news reporters found out about the two pigs I had for dinner.
They figured a sick guy going to borrow a cup of sugar didn’t sound very exciting.
So they jazzed up the story with all of that "Huff and puff and blow your house down."
And they made me the Big Bad Wolf.
That’s it.
The real story. 
I was framed.
But maybe you could loan me a cup of sugar.

Title: Trashy Town
Author: Andrea Zimmerman and David Clemesha
Mr. Gilly is a trashman.
In the morning, Mr. Gilly puts on his heavy gloves.
He climbs into his big trash truck.
He turns the key.
He drives his empty truck down the street.
He is looking for trash.
STOP!
There are trash cans by the school.
Mr. Gilly empties the cans into the truck.
Dump it in, smash it down, drive around the Trashy Town!
Is the trash truck full yet?
No.
Mr. Gilly drives on.
STOP!
There are trash cans in the park.
Mr. Gilly empties the cans into the truck.
Dump it in, smash it down, drive around the Trashy Town!
Is the trash truck full yet?
No.
Mr. Gilly drives on.
STOP!
There are trash cans behind the pizza parlor.
Mr. Gilly empties the cans into the truck.
Dump it in, smash it down, drive around the Trashy Town!
Is the trash truck full yet?
No.
Mr. Gilly drives on.
STOP!
There are trash cans next to the doctor’s office.
Mr. Gilly empties the cans into the truck.
Dump it in, smash it down, drive around the Trashy Town!
Is the trash truck full yet?
No.
Mr. Gilly drives on.
STOP!
There are trash cans by the fire station.
Mr. Gilly empties the cans into the truck.
Dump it in, smash it down, drive around the Trashy Town!
Is the trash truck full yet?
No.
Mr. Gilly drives down all the streets in Trashy Town.
He empties all the trash cans into the truck.
Dump it in, smash it down, drive around the Trashy Town!
Is the trash truck full yet?
YES!
Mr. Gilly has cleaned up the whole town!
Mr. Gilly drives the full trash truck to the dump.
Up, up, up goes the truck.
Down, down, down goes the trash.
I dumped it in.
I smashed it down.
I love to clean up Trashy Town!
Mr. Gilly turns off the key.
He takes off his gloves.
Then he goes home. 
Now there’s only one more thing to clean up. . . 
Time for a bath, Mr. Gilly!

Title: The Day the Crayons Quit
Author: Drew Daywalt
One day in class, Duncan went to take out his crayons and found a stack of letters with his name on them.
Hey Duncan,
It’s me, RED Crayon. 
WE NEED to talk. 
You make me work harder than any of your other crayons. 
All year long I wear myself out coloring FIRE ENGINES, Apples, strawberries and EVERYTHING ELSE that’s RED. 
I even work on Holidays!
I have to color all the santas at christmas and all the hearts on Valentine’s day! 
I NEED A REST!
Your overworked friend,
RED Crayon.
Dear Duncan,
All right, LISTEN.
I love that I’m your favorite crayon for grapes, dragons, and wizard’s hats, but it makes me crazy that so much of my gorgeous color goes outside the lines. 
If you DON’T START COLORING INSIDE the lines soon . . .  
I’m going to COMPLETELY LOSE IT
Your very neat friend,
Purple Crayon
Dear Duncan,
I’m tired of being called "light brown" or "Dark tan" because I am neither. 
I am BEIGE and I am proud. 
I’m also tired of being second place to Mr. Brown Crayon. 
It’s not fair that Brown gets all the bears, ponies and puppies while the only things I get are turkey dinners (if I’m lucky) and wheat, and let’s be honest–when was the last time you saw a kid excited about coloring wheat?
Your BEIGE friend, 
Beige Crayon
Duncan, GRAY Crayon here. 
You’re KILLING ME! 
I know you love Elephants And I know that elephants are gray. . .  but that’s a LOT of space to color in all by myself. 
And don’t even get me started on your rhinos, hippos and HUMPBACK WHALES. . .  you know how tired I am after handling one of those big things? 
Such BIG animals. . .  
Baby penguins are gray, you know. 
So are very tiny rocks. 
Pebbles. 
How about one of those once in a while to give me a break?
Your very tired friend, 
Gray Crayon
Dear Duncan, 
You color with me, but why? 
Most of the time I’m the same color as the page you are using me on–WHITE. 
If I didn’t have a black outline, you wouldn’t even know I was THERE! 
I’m not even in the rainbow. 
I’m only used to color SNOW or to fill in empty space between other things. 
And it leaves me feeling. . .  well. . .  empty. 
We need to talk.
Your empty friend, 
White Crayon
Hi, Duncan, 
I HATE being used to draw the outline of things. . .  
. . .  things that are colored in by other colors, all of which think they’re brighter than me! 
It’s NOT FAIR when you use me to draw a nice beach ball and then fill in the colors of the ball with ALL THE OTHER CRAYONS. 
How about a BLACK Beach ball sometime? 
Is that too much to ask?
Your Friend, 
Black Crayon
Dear Duncan, 
As Green Crayon, I am writing for two reasons. 
One is to say that I like my workloads of crocodiles, trees, dinosaurs, and frogs. 
I have no problem and wish to congratulate you on a very successful "coloring things Green" career so far.
The second reason I write is for my friends, Yellow Crayon and Orange Crayon, who are no longer speaking to each other. 
Both crayons feel THEY should be the color of the sun.
Please settle this soon because they’re driving the rest of us CRAZY!
Your happy friend, 
Green Crayon
Dear Duncan, 
Yellow Crayon here. 
I need you to tell orange crayon that I am the color of the sun. 
I would tell him but we are no longer speaking. 
And I can PROVE I’m the color of the sun too! 
Last Tuesday, you used me to color in the sun on your "HAPPY FARM" coloring book. 
In case you’ve forgotten, it’s on page 7. 
You CAN’T MISS me. 
I’m shining down brilliantly on a field of YELLOW corn!
Your pal (and the true color of the sun), 
Orange Crayon
Dear Duncan, 
I see Yellow Crayon already talked to you, the BIG WHINER.
Anyway, could you please tell Mr. Tattletale that he IS NOT the color of the sun? 
I would, but we are no longer speaking.
We both know that I am clearly the color of the SUN because, on Thursday, you used me to color the sun on BOTH the "Monkey Island" and the "Meet the Zookeeper" pages in your "DAY AT THE ZOO" coloring book. 
Orange you glad I’m here? 
Ha!
Your pal (and the real color of the sun), 
Orange Crayon
Dear DUNCAN, 
It has been great being your FAVORITE color this PAST Year. 
And the Year before THAT!
I have really enjoyed all those OCEANS, LAKES, Rivers, raindrops, rain CLOUDS and CLEAR skies.
But the BAD NEWS is that I am so short and stubby, I can’t even see over the railing in the CRAYON BOX anymore! 
I need a BREAK!
Your very stubby friend. 
Blue Crayon
Duncan, Okay, LISTEN HERE, KID! 
You have not used me ONCE in the past year.
It’s because you think I am a GIRLS’ color, isn’t it? 
Speaking of which, please tell your little sister I said thank you for using me to color in her "little princess" coloring book. 
I think she did a fabulous job of staying inside the lines!
Now, back to us. 
Could you PLEASE use me sometime to color the occasional PINK dinosaur or MONSTER or cowboy? 
Goodness knows they could use a splash of color.
Your unused friend, 
Pink Crayon
Hey Duncan, 
It’s me, PEACH CRAYON. 
WHY did you peel off my paper wrapping?? 
Now I’m NAKED and too embarrassed to leave the crayon box.
I don’t even have any underwear! 
How would You like to go to school naked? 
I need some clothes. 
HELP!
Your naked friend, 
PEACH Crayon
Well, poor Duncan just wanted to color . . .
And of course he wanted his crayons to be happy.
And that gave him an idea.
Then Duncan showed his teacher his new picture, she gave him an A for coloring. . . 
And an A+ for creativity!

Title: Arthur Writes a Story
Author: Marc Brown
Arthur’s teacher, Mr. Rathburn, explained the homework.
"What should the story be about?" Arthur asked.
"Anything," Mr. Rathburn said.
"Write about something that is important to you."
Arthur started his story the minute he got home.
He knew exactly what he wanted to write about.
How I got my Puppy Pal.
I always wanted a dog, but first I had to prove I was responsible.
So I started Arthur’s Pet Business.
My mom made me keep all the animals in the basement.
It was a lot of work, but it was fun until I thought I lost perky.
But then I found her, and she had three puppies!
And I got to keep one of them.
That’s how I got my dog Pal
The End
Arthur read his story to DW.
"That’s a boring story," D.W. said.
"Does it have to be real life?
Because your life is so dull."
"I don’t want to write a boring story," Said Arthur.
"If it were me, "D.W. suggested, "I’d make the story about getting an elephant."
The next day, Arthur read his new story to Buster.
"Did you like the part about the elephant puppies?" he asked.
"It’s okay, I guess," said Buster.
"I’m writing a cool story about outer space."
Maybe my story should take place on the moon thought Arthur.
On Wednesday, Arthur read his newest story to the Brain.
"Scientifically speaking, elephants would weigh less on the moon, but wouldn’t float that high," Said the brain
"So you don’t like it?" asked Arthur.
"A good story should be well researched," Said the Brain.
"Like mine: ‘If I Had a Pet Stegosaurus in the Jurassic Period.’"
Arthur hurried to the library.
"What are all those books for?" asked Francine.
"Research," said Arthur. 
"I’m writing about my pet five-toed mammal of the genus Loxodonta."
"Your what?" asked Francine.
"My elephant!" Arthur explained.
"Oh," said Francine. 
"I’m putting jokes in my story."
All through dinner, Arthur worried about his story.
"Please pass the corn," asked Father.
"Corn! 
That’s it!" said Arthur.
"Purple corn and blue elephants!
On Planet Shmellafint!
Now that’s funny."
"Arthur is acting weirder than usual," said D.W.
On Thursday, everyone at the Sugar Bowl was talking about their stories.
"Last year, a kid wrote a country-western song for her story," Said Prunella.
"And she got an A+"
"How do you know?" asked Arthur.
"That kid was me," explained Prunella.
"Mr. Ratburn said I should send it to a record company.
It was that good."
"Wow!" said Arthur.
That night, Arthur’s imagination went wild.
He decided to turn his story into a song.
He even made up a dance to go with it.
Later, he tried it out on his family.
". . . Now this little boy can go home and enjoy his own personal striped elephant.
And you will see How happy he will be here on Planet. . .  Shmellafint!"
"Well," said Arthur. "What do you think?"
Mother and Father smiled.
"It’s nice," said Grandma Thora.
 "But a little confusing."
"Too bad you can’t dance," said D.W.
"What am I going to do?" said Arthur.
"My story is due tomorrow."
That night Arthur didn’t sleep very well.
The next day, Arthur worried until Mr. Ratburn finally called on him.
When Arthur’s song and dance was over, the classroom was so quiet it was almost spooky.
Blinky raised his hand.
"Did that really happen?"
"Sort of," said Arthur.
"It started as the story of how I got my dog."
"I’d like to hear that story," said Mr. Ratburn.
"The title was ‘How I Got My Puppy Pal," said Arthur.
Arthur told how proud he was of his pet business and how scared he was when Perky disappeared.  
And he told how happy he was to find her under his bed and how surprised he was to see her three puppies.
"And the best part is," said Arthur, "I got to keep one!"
Buster said, "I like that story better than your other one."
"Great story!" said Blinky.
"I think Arthur’s story was the best!" said Francine.
"Good work," said Mr. Ratburn.
"Of course, I expect you to write it all down by Monday."
Then Mr. Ratburn gave Arthur a gold sticker.
"Oh, and one more thing," he said.
"Leave out the dancing!"

Title: Bunny Party
Author: Rosemary Wells
"Max," said Max’s sister, Ruby.
"It’s time for Grandma’s birthday party!"
Max wound up his Jellyball Shooter Spider.
The spider shot red, blue, and yellow jellyballs.
"I sent out 10 party invitations, Max," said Ruby.
"All the guests wrote back and checked the Yes box.
Will you help me put out the name cards?"
"1 is Rapunzel.
2 is Curly Shirley Shirley.
3 is the Tooth Fairy.
4 and 5 are Mr. and Mrs. Quack.
6 is Pinocchio, and 7 is walky-talky Teddy Bear.
Then there’s me, you, and Grandma."
But Max did not like any of Ruby’s guests.
He wanted to put his Jellyball Shooter Spider, his Ear-splitter Space Cadet, and his Can’t-Sit-Up Slug in the chairs next to Grandma’s place.
"No, Max," said Ruby.
"Grandma hates spiders and slugs and space cadets.
Grandma wants to sit between Rapunzel and the Tooth Fairy.
Max pushed the red button on the Space Cadet’s Ear-Splitter Space Siren.
Ruby put all the guests in their chairs.
"1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 stuffed guests, Max," said Ruby.
Ruby went to get snappers and candy kisses.
Max took the crown and wig off Rapunzel and put them on his spider.
Then Max put Rapunzel in his own seat and the Jellyball shooter in Rapunzel’s seat.
Ruby filled the favor baskets with Kisses.
She did not notice the spider.
"That’s funny, Mam," said Ruby."
"All the guests are in their seats.
But there are only two chairs left for Grandma, you, and me.
I must have counted wrong, Max!" said Ruby.
"1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8!"
Ruby did not know where the extra guest had come from.
"I will have to set another place, Max," said Ruby.
Max fetched his Can’t-Sit-Up Slug.
He put the Tooth Fairy’s magic wand and wings on the Slug.
Then he sat the Slug in the Tooth Fairy’s seat and moved the Tooth Fairy to another seat.
Ruby came back with a new place setting.
She did not notice the slug.
"Something’s wrong, Max," said Ruby.
"1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 guests!
Somewhere there are 2 extra guests.
It must be a bad counting day.
We need another chair!"
Max took his Ear-Splitter Space Cadet and dressed him in Mrs. Quack’s sun hat and veil.
Then he put the Space Cadet into Grandma’s seat.
"How many people at this table, Max?" said Ruby.
"9, 3, 2," said Max.
"There are 10 guests now!" said Ruby.
Suddenly Grandma knocked at the door.
Max introduced Grandma to the Jellyball Shooter Spider and the Ear-Splitter Space Cadet.
The Can’t-Sit-Up Slug slumped in its chair.
"I have just discovered 3 uninvited guests!" said Ruby.
"How exciting!" said Grandma.
Grandma made sure that the uninvited guests all had their snappers and their candy Kisses and their favorite flavors of ice cream

Title: If You Give a Moose a Muffin
Author: Laura Joffe Numeroff
If you give a moose a muffin, he’ll want some jam to go with it.
So you’ll bring out some of your mother’s homemade blackberry jam.
When he’s finished eating the muffin, he’ll want another.
And another.
And another.
When they’re all gone, he’ll ask you to make more. 
You’ll have to go to the store to get some muffin mix.
He’ll want to go with you.
When he opens the door and feels how chilly it is, he’ll ask to borrow a sweater.
When he puts the sweater on, he’ll notice one of the buttons is loose.
He’ll ask for a needle and thread.
He’ll start sewing.
The button will remind him of the puppets his grandmother used to make.
So he’ll ask for some old socks. 
He’ll make sock puppets.
When they’re done, he’ll want to put on a puppet show.
He’ll need some cardboard and paints.
Then he’ll ask you to help make the scenery.
When the scenery is finished, he’ll get behind the couch.
But his antlers will stick out.
So he’ll ask for something to cover them up.
You’ll bring him a sheet from your bed.
When he sees the sheet, he’ll remember he wants to be a ghost for Halloween.
He’ll try it on and shout, "BOO!"
It’ll scare him so much; he’ll knock over the paints.
So he’ll use the sheet to clean up the mess.
Then he’ll ask for some soap to wash it out.
He’ll probably want to hang the sheet up to dry.
He’ll go outside to put it on the clothesline. 
When he’s out in the yard, he’ll see your mother’s blackberry bushes. 
Seeing the blackberries will remind him of her jam.
He’ll probably ask you for some.
And chances are. . .  if you give him the jam, he’ll want a muffin to go with it. 

Title: That Is Not a Good Idea!
Author: Mo Willems
"What luck!"
"Dinner!"
"Excuse me. 
Would you care to go for a stroll?"
"Hmm. . .  sure!"
"That is NOT a good idea!"
"Would you care to continue our walk into the deep, dark woods?"
"Sounds fun!"
"That is REALLY NOT a good idea!"
"Would you care to visit my nearby kitchen?"
"I would love to!" 
"That is REALLY REALLY NOT a good idea!"
"Would you care to boil some water for soup?"
"Certainly, I do love soup!"
"That is REALLY REALLY REALLY NOT a good idea!"
"Would you care to look at my soup? 
A key ingredient is missing."
"That is REALLY REALLY REALLY REALLY NOT a good idea!"
"Oh- a key ingredient is missing."
YOU!
Well, we DID try to warn him.
More soup, children?

Title: The Berenstain Bears and the Green-Eyed Monster
Author: Stan & Jan Berenstain
It was a happy time in the big tree house down a sunny dirt road in Bear Country- a happy birthday time.
It was Brother Bear’s birthday, and he was getting some very fine presents.
Brother wasn’t exactly having a party, but Cousin Fred, Lizzy Bruin, and Babs Bruno were there.
And, Gramps and Gran, of course.
"Wow!" said Brother when he opened his Present from Gramps. 
It was an aluminum bat.
"Thanks, Gramps. 
I’ll hit twenty home runs with this!"
Gran’s Present was a great-looking warm-up jacket. 
Brother tried it on and looked in the mirror.
"Thank You, Gran. 
It’s really neat," he said.
His other presents were a fielder’s glove from Cousin Fred, a sports video from Lizzy Bruin, and a mystery book from Babs Bruno.
Sister’s very thoughtful gift was a package of balsa wood, the special wood Brother used for making model airplanes.
"Thank you! 
Thank you! 
Thank you all!" he said.
"You’re welcome and happy birthday!" said the gift givers.
Sister’s gift was thoughtful. 
But she was being thoughtful in another way, too. 
It isn’t always easy when your brother gets a lot of presents and you don’t. 
Sister understood that she had gotten presents when it was her birthday and would again. 
Besides, she wasn’t that interested in aluminum bats, warm-up jackets, fielder’s gloves, sports videos, or balsa wood, anyway.
But all that changed when Mama and Papa Bear gave Brother their present.
It was the biggest, most beautiful racing bike Sister had ever seen.
It had a hand brake, three speeds, and super-sport wheels.
When Sister saw that beautiful bike, it was no longer, "Happy birthday, Brother!" It was, "I gotta have that bike! 
I gotta! 
I gotta! 
I gotta!"
Mama saw that I-gotta-have-it look in Sister’s eyes.
She took her aside and reminded her about all the wonderful presents she had gotten on her last birthday. 
But Sister didn’t hear a word Mama said.
She just stared at that big, beautiful bike with the hand brake and the super-sport wheels. 
"Oh, dear," said Mama. 
"I think you’ve been taken over by the green-eyed monster."
"Green-eyed monster?" said Sister.
"What’s that?"
"Oh," said Mama.
"That’s just a way folks have of talking about jealousy and envy.
You know what it means to be jealous.
Envy is when you want something that belongs to somebody else."
"But, Mama," said Sister.
"It’s such a great beautiful bike!"
"Please listen to me, Sister," said Mama.
"Even if you had a bike like that, you couldn’t ride it.
You’re not big enough.
Your feet wouldn’t reach the pedals.
Besides, look what Papa’s got for you."
Papa was wheeling in Brother’s junior-size bike with its training wheels attached.
"It’s yours now," he said.
Sister looked at the bike Brother had outgrown.
It was okay, but it didn’t have a hand brake, three speeds, and super-sport wheels.
"Come on now," said Mama. 
"Our guests are leaving. 
It’s time to say good-bye."
"Good-bye!" said Brother. 
"Thank you all for the wonderful presents!"
"Bye," said Sister. 
Gramps and Gran got into their pickup truck and headed for home. 
Lizzy Bruin got into her dad’s car with the others. 
Mr. Bruin had agreed to come for them and drive them home. 
Then papa helped carry the new bike down the front steps. 
Mama and papa watched proudly as Brother climbed on and tried it out.
First Brother rode big, fast circles around the tree house. 
Then he did a few wheelies. 
When he started riding with his feet up on the handlebars, Mama got worried.
"Now let’s not be reckless!" she said.
Sister watched, too. 
She had gone inside and was watching from a window. 
As she did so she became filled with envy. 
From the tips of her pink hair bow down to the tips of her toenails, Sister really wanted that big, beautiful racing bike.
That night Sister was having trouble falling asleep because she was still thinking about the bike. 
Then just as her eyes were closing the strangest thing happened. 
She had a visitor. 
The visitor looked exactly like Sister, except she was green and had little horns on her head. 
"I know who you are," Sister said. 
"You’re the green-eyed monster."
Sister was having a dream, of course.
But she didn’t know that.
That’s the thing about dreams.
They’re so real.
"Come," said the green-eyed monster.
"If you want a bike like Brother’s, all you have to do is prove you’re big enough to ride it."
Before she quite knew what was happening, she was up on the bike and the green-eyed monster was giving her a big push.
The bike was much too big for her.
Her feet couldn’t even almost reach the pedals.
Then, as so often happens in dreams, things began to change.
The bike got bigger and bigger and BIGGER!
Now Sister was speeding down a hill.
At the bottom was a great rock. 
She smashed into it. 
There was a huge crash!
Brother’s beautiful new birthday bike flew into a thousand pieces. 
"What have I done?" she screamed. 
"What have I done?"
Mama and Papa, who had just fallen asleep, came running into the cubs’ room. 
"Oh, Mama!" cried Sister.
"I just smashed Brother’s beautiful birthday bike into a thousand pieces! 
A thousand pieces!"
"Try to calm down, sweetie," said Mama.
"Brother’s bike is perfectly safe. 
You were having a dream."
"What’s going on?" said Brother, rubbing his eyes.
"I’ll go downstairs and get us all some warm milk," said Papa. 
"It’ll help us get back to sleep."
And it did.
The next day Sister’s best friend, Lizzy, came over to play.
She and Sister had a fun time riding around the yard.
Brother’s old bike turned out to be just right for Sister.
Lizzy had a good time on Sister’s old trike.
And Brother rode circles around them on his birthday bike. 
Later, when Mr. Bruin came over to pick up Lizzy, he had a very big surprise for everybody. 
He had just traded in his old car for a beautiful brand-new one.
And what a car it was! 
It had wire wheels, leather seats, and racing stripes.
Mama, Brother, Sister, and Lizzy congratulated Mr. Bruin on his fine new car.
But not Papa.
He just stood and stared.
He had the same I-gotta-have-it look that Sister had when she first saw Brother’s new bike.
"Papa," said Sister.
"I think you better watch out for ‘you know who’!"
Papa did know who.
"Mr. Bruin," he said, "congratulations on a fine new car!"
After the Bruins drove away, Mama and Papa sat on the tree house steps and watched Brother and Sister do some plain and fancy bike riding.

Title: The Paper Bag Princess
Author: Robert N. Munsch
Elizabeth was a beautiful princess.
She lived in a castle and had expensive princess clothes.
She was going to marry a prince named Ronald.
Unfortunately, a dragon smashed her castle, burned all her clothes with his fiery breath, and carried off Prince Ronald.
Elizabeth decided to chase the dragon and get Ronald back.
She looked everywhere for something to wear, but the only thing she could find that was not burnt was a paper bag.
So she put on the paper bag and followed the dragon.
He was easy to follow because he left a trail of burnt forests and horses’ bones.
Finally, Elizabeth came to a cave with a large door that had a huge knocker on it. 
She took hold of the knocker and banged on the door.
The dragon stuck his nose out of the door and said, "Well, a princess! 
I love to eat princesses, but I have already eaten a whole castle today. 
I am a very busy dragon. 
Come back tomorrow."
He slammed the door so fast that Elizabeth almost got her nose caught.
Elizabeth grabbed the knocker and banged on the door again.
The dragon stuck his nose out of the door and said, "Go away. 
I love to eat princesses, but I have already eaten a whole castle today. 
I am a very busy dragon.
Come back tomorrow."
"Wait," shouted Elizabeth.
"Is it true that you are the smartest and fiercest dragon in the whole world?"
"Yes," said the dragon.
"Fantastic," said Elizabeth, and the dragon took another huge breath and breathed out so much fire that he burnt up one hundred forests.
"Magnificent," said Elizabeth, and the dragon took another huge breath, but this time nothing came out.
The dragon didn’t even have enough fire left to cook a meatball.
Elizabeth said, "Dragon, is it true that you can fly around the world in just ten seconds?"
"Why, yes," said the dragon, and jumped up and flew all the way around the world in just ten seconds.
He was very tired when he got back, but Elizabeth shouted, "Fantastic, do it again!"
So the dragon jumped up and flew around the whole world in just twenty seconds.
When he got back he was too tired to talk, and he lay down and went straight to sleep.
Elizabeth whispered, very softly, "Hey, dragon." 
The dragon didn’t move at all.
She lifted up the dragon’s ear and put her head right inside.
She shouted as loud as she could, "Hey, dragon!"
The dragon was so tired he didn’t even move.
Elizabeth walked right over the dragon and opened the door to the cave.
There was Prince Ronald. 
He looked at her and said, "Elizabeth, you are a mess! 
You smell like ashes, your hair is all tangled and you are wearing a dirty old paper bag.
Come back when you are dressed like a real princess."
"Ronald," said Elizabeth, "your clothes are really pretty and your hair is very neat.
You look like a real prince, but you are a bum."
They didn’t get married after all.

Title: Winter Days in the Big Woods
Author: Laura Ingalls Wilder
Once upon a time, a little girl named Laura lived in the Big Woods of Wisconsin in a little house made of logs.
Laura lived in the little house with her Pa, her Ma, her big sister Mary, her baby sister Carrie, and their good old bulldog Jack.
Winter was coming to the Big Woods.
Soon the little house would be covered with snow.
Pa went hunting every day so that they would have meat during the long, cold winter.
Ma, Laura, and Mary gathered potatoes and carrots, beets and turnips, cabbages and onions, and peppers and pumpkins from the garden next to the little house. 
By the time winter came, the little house was full of good things to eat.
Laura and Mary thought the attic was a lovely place to play.
They played house by using the round orange pumpkins as tables and chairs, and everything was snug and cozy.
Soon the first snow came, and it was very cold.
In the mornings the windows were covered with beautiful frost pictures of trees and flowers and fairies.
Ma said that Jack Frost came in the night and made the pictures while everyone was asleep.
Laura and Mary were allowed to use Ma’s thimble to make pretty patterns of circles in the frost.
In the mornings Laura and Mary helped Ma wash the dishes and make the beds.
After this was done, Ma began the work that belonged to that day.
Each day had its own proper work.
Ma would say"
"Wash on Monday, Iron on Tuesday, mend on Wednesday, churn on Thursday, clean on Friday, bake on Saturday, rest on Sunday."
Laura liked the churning and baking days best of all.
Ma had to churn the cream for a long time until it turned into butter.
Mary could sometimes churn while Ma rested, but Laura was too little.
On Saturdays, when Ma made the bread, Laura and Mary each had a little piece of dough to make into a little loaf.
Ma even gave them a bit of cookie dough to make little cookies.
After the day’s work was done, Ma would sometimes cut out paper dolls for Laura and Mary.
She drew their faces on with a pencil, and cut dresses, hats, and ribbons out of colored paper so that Mary and Laura could dress their dolls beautifully.
But the best time of all was at night, when Pa came home.
He would throw off his fur cap and coat and mittens and call, "Where’s my little half-pint of sweet cider half drunk up?"
That was Laura, because she was so small.
Sometimes Pa would take down his fiddle and sing. 
Pa would keep time with his foot. 
Laura and Mary would clap their hands to the music when he sang:
"Yankee Doodle went to town, He wore his striped trousies, he swore he couldn’t see the town, there was so many houses."
Other times Pa would tell stories.
When Laura and Mary begged him for a story, he would take them on his knees and tickle their faces with his long whiskers until they laughed out loud.
His eyes were blue and merry.
Outside it was cold and snowy, but the little log cabin was snug and cozy.
Pa, Ma, Laura, Mary, and Baby Carrie were comfortable and happy in their little house in the Big Woods.

Title: Angelina Ice Skates
Author: Katharine Holabird
Angelina absolutely loved snowy winter days when she could ice skate with her friends on Miller’s Pond.
The ice sparkled like glass and they raced across it in pairs, practicing spins and twirls and figure-eights.
Everyone in the village was getting ready for New Year’s Eve, and Angelina was preparing a special ice skating show.
Her little cousin Henry wanted to be in the show, too, even though he often tumbled off the ice and fell into the snowbanks.
"We’ll need someone to be the Snow King," said Angelina’s friend Flora, pirouetting across the ice as the Snow Princess.
"I’ll be the King!" shouted Henry, but then he tripped and slid into Alice, who was going to be the Snow Fairy.
"You’d be a better snow shovel!" said Alice crossly as she dusted off her skates.
"Don’t worry, Henry," said Angelina. 
"Hold on to me and let’s practice skating together."
They linked their tails and tried to skate in a circle, but it wasn’t easy on the slippery ice.
Just then Spike and Sammy, two big boys from school, raced by playing hockey and almost knocked them all over.
"HEY!" shouted Felicity, but the boys were already gone, laughing and yelling across the ice.
"Never mind," said Angelina, helping Felicity get her balance. 
"Let me show you how to skate backwards. "
But, before long, Spike and Sammy tore past again, spraying snow in all directions. 
When they zipped through Angelina’s rehearsal a third time, she got angry.
"Please stop interrupting us!" she scolded.
But the boys just laughed, grabbed Angelina’s scarf, and tweaked Flora’s whiskers.
"Little ballerinas can’t catch us!" they shouted as they zoomed away.
Angelina and her friends chased Spike and Sammy all across the ice, and then Angelina made a huge snowball and hurled it at the boys.
"Great! 
A snowball fight!" Spike yelled, throwing one back at Angelina. 
Then everybody started throwing snowballs everywhere, and soon Miller’s Pond was a blizzard of flying snow and shouting skaters.
They had so much fun, they stayed until Flora got ice down her neck and Alice’s toes began to freeze. 
Then they trudged back to Angelina’s house, feeling tired and frozen.
"What’s wrong?" asked Angelina’s mother.
"Our New Year’s Eve Ice Dance is a mess," said Angelina sadly. 
"We haven’t got costumes or scenery and Spike and Sammy keep bothering us."
"I can help you with costumes," said Mrs. Mouseling.
"And maybe the boys are teasing you because they want you to pay attention to them."
Angelina was surprised. 
"That gives me an idea."
The next day Angelina put on her skates and whizzed past Spike and Sammy, snatched their caps, and raced off laughing with the boys just behind her. 
They were very fast, but Angelina could do all sorts of tricky twists and spins and, just as Spike and Sammy thought they would grab her, she spun out of reach and they smashed into each other, collapsing on the ice.
Spike gazed at Angelina in admiration. 
"You ballerinas are fast!"
"Would you like to be in our show?" asked Angelina, tossing back their caps.
Spike and Sammy leapt up.
"Yes!" they shouted, skating in circles around her.
Sammy loved doing funny tricks and Spike, who could skate backwards, was proud to be the Snow King. 
Best of all, they helped Henry build a huge snow fort. 
"It will make a nice snow palace for our show," said Henry enthusiastically.
"What a great idea!" admired Angelina.
On New Year’s Eve, the whole village dressed up and came to celebrate. 
Miller’s Pond looked magical as the performers skated on to the ice in Mrs. Mouseling’s costumes, and Henry’s snow fort gleamed in the moonlight.
When Angelina danced into the spotlight that night, she felt just like a real snow queen. 
Spike and Sammy did exciting leaps and jumps together and Henry was thrilled to be the King’s attendant, while Felicity, Flora, and Alice seemed to fly across the ice like delicate snowflakes.
At the end of the performance, as the magic hour of midnight approached and fireworks sparkled in the sky, Angelina and her friends wished everyone joy and peace, and they all sang and danced together to welcome in the New Year.

Title: Horton Hears a Who!
Author: Dr. Seuss
On the fifteenth of May, in the Jungle of Nool, in the heat of the day, in the cool of the pool, He was splashing. . .  enjoying the jungle’s great joys. . .  When Horton the elephant heard a small noise.
So Horton stopped splashing.
He looked toward the sound.
"That’s funny," thought Horton.
"There’s no one around."
Then he heard it again!
Just a very faint yelp as if some tiny person were calling for help.
"I’ll help you," said Horton.
"But who are you? Where?" He looked and looked.
He could see nothing there but a small speck of dust blowing past through the air.
"I say!" murmured Horton.
"I’ve never heard tell of a small speck of dust that is able to yell.
So you know what I think? . . .  
Why, I think that there must be someone on top of that small speck of dust!
Some sort of a creature of very small size, too small to be seen by an elephant’s eyes. . .  some poor little person who’s shaking with fear that he’ll blow in the pool!
He has no way to steer!
I’ll just have to save him.
Because, after all, a person’s a person, no matter how small."
So, gently, and using the greatest of care, The elephant stretched his great trunk through the air, and he lifted the dust speck and carried it over and placed it down, safe, on a very soft clover.
"Humpf!" humpfed a voice.  
‘Twas a sour kangaroo.
And the young kangaroo in her pouch said "Humpf!" too.
"Why, that speck is as small as the head of a pin.
A person on that?
Why, there never has been!"
"Believe me," said Horton.
"I tell you sincerely, my ears are quite keen and I heard him quite clearly.
I know there’s a person down there.
And, what’s more, quite likely there’s two.
Even three.
Even four.
Quite likely. . .  a family, for all that we know!
A family with children just starting to grow.
So, please," Horton said, "as a favor to me, try not to disturb them.
Just please let them be."
"I think you’re a fool!" laughed the sour kangaroo and the young kangaroo in her pouch said, "Me, too!
You’re the biggest blame fool in the Jungle of Nool!"
And the kangaroos plunged in the cool of the pool. 
"What terrible splashing!" the elephant frowned.
"I can’t let my very small persons get drowned!
I’ve got to protect them. 
I’m bigger than they."
So he plucked up the clover and hustled away.
Through the high jungle tree tops, the news quickly spread: 
"He talks to a dust speck!
He’s out of his head!
Just look at him walk with that speck on that flower!"
And Horton walked, worrying, almost an hour.
"Should I put this speck down?. . . " Horton thought with alarm.
"If I do, these small persons may come to great harm.
I can’t put it down.
And I won’t!
After all a person’s a person.
No matter how small."
Then Horton stopped walking.
The speck-voice was talking!
The voice was so faint he could just barely hear it.
"Speak up, please," said Horton. 
He put his ear near it.
"My friend," came the voice, "you’re a very fine friend.
You’ve helped all us folks on this dust speck no end.
You’ve saved all our houses, our ceilings and floors.
You’ve saved all our churches and grocery stores.’’
"You mean. . . " Horton gasped, "you have buildings there, too?"
"Oh, yes," piped the voice. "We most certainly do."
"I know," called the voice, "I’m too small to be seen but I’m Mayor of a town that is friendly and clean.
Our buildings, to you, would seem terribly small but to us, who aren’t big, they are wonderfully tall.
My town is called Who-ville, for I am a who and we whos are all thankful and grateful to you."
And Horton called back to the Mayor of the town, "You’re safe now.
Don’t worry.
I won’t let you down."
But, just as he spoke to the Mayor of the speck, three big jungle monkeys climbed up Horton’s neck!
The Wickersham brothers came shouting, "What rot!
This elephant’s talking to Whos who are not!
There aren’t any Whos!
And they don’t have a Mayor!
And we’re going to stop all this nonsense! 
So there!"
They snatched Horton’s clover! 
They carried it off to a black-bottomed eagle named Vlad Vlad-i-koff, A mighty strong eagle, of very swift wing, And they said, "Will you kindly get rid of this thing?"
And, before the poor elephant even could speak, that eagle flew off with the flower in his beak.
All that late afternoon and far into the night that black-bottomed bird flapped his wings in fast flight, while Horton chased after, with groans, over stones that tattered his toenails and battered his bones, and begged, "please don’t harm all my little folks, who have as much right to live as us bigger folks do!"
But far, far beyond him, that eagle kept flapping and over his shoulder called back, "Quit your yapping. 
I’ll fly the night through. 
I’m a bird. 
I don’t mind it.
And I’ll hid this, tomorrow, where you’ll never find it!"
And at 6:56 the next morning he did it.
It sure was a terrible place that he hid it.
He let that small clover drop somewhere inside of a great patch of clovers a hundred miles wide!
"Find that!" sneered the bird.
"But I think you will fail."
And he left with a flip of his black-bottomed tail.
"I’ll find it!" cried Horton. 
"I’ll find it or bust!
I shall find my friends on my small speck of dust!"
And clover, by clover, by clover he found that the one that he sought for was just not around.
And by noon poor old Horton, more dead than alive, had picked, searched, and piled up, nine thousand and five.
Then, on through the afternoon, hour after hour. . . 
Till he found them at last!
On the three millionth flower!
"My friends!" cried the elephant.
"Tell me! Do tell!
Are you safe?
Are you sound?
Are you whole?
Are you well?"
From down on the speck came the voice of the Mayor:
"We’ve really had trouble! 
Much more than our share.
When that black-bottomed birdie let go and we dropped, we landed so hard that our clocks have all stopped.
Our tea-pots are broken.
 Our rocking-chairs smashed.
And our bicycle tires all blew up when we crashed.
So, Horton, please!" pleaded that voice of the Mayor’s, "Will you stick by us Whos while we’re making repairs?"
"Of course," Horton answered. 
"Of course I will stick.
I’ll stick by you small folks through thin and through thick!"
"Humpf!" humpfed a voice!
"For almost two days you’ve run wild and insisted on chatting with persons who’ve never existed.
Such carryings-on in our peaceable jungle!
We’ve had quite enough of your bellowing bungle!
And I’m here to state," snapped the big kangaroo, "That your silly nonsensical game is all through!"
And the young kangaroo in her pouch said, "Me, too!"
"With the help of the wickersham brothers and dozens of wickersham uncles and wickersham cousins and wickersham in-laws, whose help I’ve engaged, you’re going to be roped!
And you’re going to be caged!
And, as for your dust speck. . .  hah!
That we shall boil in a hot steaming kettle of beezle-nut oil!"
"Boil it?. . . " gasped Horton!
"Oh, that you can’t do!
It’s all full of persons!
They’ll prove it to you!"
"Mr. Mayor! 
Mr. Mayor!" Horton called.
"Mr. Mayor! You’ve got to Prove now that you really are there!
So call a big meeting. 
Get everyone out’
Make every who holler! 
Make every Who shout!
Make every Who scream! 
If you don’t, every Who is going to end up in a Beezle-Nut stew!"
And, down on the dust speck, the scared little Mayor Quick called a big meeting in Who-ville Town square.
And his people cried loudly.
They cried out in fear:
"We are here!
We are here!
We are here!
We are here!"
The elephant smiled:
"That was clear as a bell.
You kangaroos surely heard that very well."
"All I heard," snapped the big kangaroo, "was the breeze, and the faint sound of wind through the far-distant trees.
I heard no small voices.
And you didn’t either."
And the young kangaroo in her pouch said, "Me, neither."
"Grab him!" they shouted. 
"And cage the big dope!
Lasso his stomach with ten miles of rope!
Tie the knots tight so he’ll never shake loose!
Then dunk that dumb speck in the Beezle-Nut juice!"
Horton fought back with great vigor and vim but the wickersham gang was too many for him.
They beat him! 
They mauled him! 
They started to haul
Him into his cage! 
But he managed to call To the Mayor: 
"Don’t give up! 
I believe in you all!
A Person’s a Person, no matter how small!
And you very small persons will not have to die if you make yourselves heard! 
So come on, now, and TRY!"
The Mayor grabbed a tom-tom. 
He started to smack it.
And, all over Who-ville, they whooped up a racket.
They rattled tin kettles! 
They beat on brass pans, On garbage pail tops and old cranberry cans!
They blew on bazookas and blasted great toots on clarinets, oom-pahs and boom-pahs and flutes!
Great gusts of loud racket rang high through the air.
They rattled and shook the whole sky!
And the Mayor called up through the howling mad hullabaloo:
"Hey, Horton! How’s this? 
Is our sound coming through?"
And Horton called back, "I can hear you just find.
But the kangaroos’ ears aren’t as strong, quite, as mine.
They don’t hear a thing! 
Are you sure all your boys are doing their best?
Are they ALL making noise?
Are you sure every who down in Who-ville is working?
Quick! 
Look through your town! 
Is there anyone shirking?"
Through the town rushed the Mayor, from the east to the west.
But everyone seemed to be doing his best.
Everyone seemed to be yapping or yipping!
Everyone seemed to be beeping or bipping!
But it wasn’t enough, all this ruckus and roar!
He HAD to find someone to help him make more.
He raced through each building! 
He searched floor-to-floor!
And, just as he felt he was getting nowhere, and almost about to give up in despair, he suddenly burst through a door and that Mayor discovered one shirker!
Quite hidden away in the Fairfax apartments (Apartment 12-J) A very small, very small shirker named Jo-jo was standing, just standing, and bouncing a yo-yo!
Not making a sound!
Not a yipp!
Not a chirp!
And the mayor rushed inside and he grabbed the young twerp!
And he climbed with the lad up the Eiffelberg Tower.
"This," cried the Mayor, "is your town’s darkest hour!
The time for all Whos who have blood that is red to come to the aid of their country!" he said. 
"We’ve GOT to make noises in greater amounts!
So, open your mouth, lad!
For every voice counts!"
Thus he spoke as he climbed.
Whey they got to the top, the lad cleared his throat and he shouted, "Yopp!"
And that Yopp. . . 
That one small, extra Yopp put it over!
Finally, at last!
From that speck on that clover their voices were heard!
They rang out clear and clean.
And the elephant smiled.
"Do you see what I mean?. . . 
They’ve proved they are persons, no matter how small.
And their whole world was saved by the smallest of all!"
"How true!
Yes, how true," said the big Kangaroo. 
"And, from now on, you know what I’m planning to do?. . . 
From now on, I’m going to protect them with you!"
And the young kangaroo in her pouch said, "ME, TOO!
From sun in the summer.
From rain in when it’s fall-ish, I’m going to protect them.
No matter how small-ish!"

Title: Bread and Jam for Frances
Author: Russell Hoban
It was breakfast time, and everyone was at the table.
Father was eating his egg.
Mother was eating her egg.
Gloria was sitting in a high chair and eating her egg too.
Frances was eating bread and jam.
"What a lovely egg!" said Father.
"If there is one thing I am fond of for breakfast, it is a soft-boiled egg."
"Yes," said Mother, spooning up egg for the baby. "it is just the thing to start the day off right."
"Ah!" said Gloria, and ate up her egg.
Frances did not eat her egg.
She sang a little song to it.
She sand the song very softly:
I do not like the way you slide,
I do not like your soft inside,
I do not like you lots of ways,
And I could do for many days
Without eggs.
"What did you say, Frances? Asked Father.
"Nothing," said Frances, spreading jam on another slice of bread.
"Why do you keep eating bread and jam," asked Father, "when you have a lovely soft-boiled egg?"
"One of the reasons I like bread and jam," said Frances, "is that it does not slide off your spoon in a funny way."
"Well, of course," said Father.
"not everyone is fond of soft-boiled eggs for breakfast. 
But there are other kinds of eggs.
There are sunny-side-up and sunny-side-down eggs."
"Yes," said Frances.
"But sunny-side-up eggs lie on the plate and look up at you in a funny way.
And sunny-side-down eggs just lie on their stomachs and wait."
"What about scrambled eggs?" said Father.
"Scrambled eggs fall off the fork and roll under the table." Said Frances.
"I think it is time for you to go to school now," said Mother.
Frances picked up her books, her lunch box, and her skipping rope.
Then she kissed Mother and Father good-bye and went to the bus stop.
While she waited for the bus she skipped and sang:
Jam on biscuits, jam on toast, Jam is the thing that I like most.
Jam is sticky, jam is sweet, 
Jam is tasty, jam’s a treat-
Raspberry, strawberry, gooseberry, I’m very FOND . . . OF . . . JAM!
That evening for dinner, Mother cooked breaded veal cutlets with string beans and baked potatoes.
"Ah! said Father.
"What is there handsomer on a plate and tastier to eat than breaded veal cutlet!"
"It is a nice dish, isn’t it?" said Mother.
"Eat up the string bean, Gloria."
"Oh!" said Gloria, and ate it up.
She had already eaten her dinner of strained beef and sweet potatoes, but she liked to practice with a string bean when she could.
"Where do breaded veal cutlets come from?" asked Frances.
"And why are French-cut stringless beans called string beans?"
"We can talk about that another time," said Father.
"Now it is time to eat our dinner."
Frances looked at her plate and sang:
What do cutlets wear before they’re breaded?
Flannel nightgowns?
Cowboy boots?
Furry jackets? 
Sailor suits?
Then she spread jam on a slice of bread and took a bite.
"She won’t try anything new," said Mother to Father.
"She just eats bread and jam."
"How do you know what you’ll like if you won’t even try anything?" asked Father.
"Well,’ said Frances,
"there are many different things to eat, and they taste many different ways.
But when I have bread and jam I always know what I am getting, and I am always pleased."
"You try new things in your school lunches," said Mother.
"Today I gave you a chicken-salad sandwich."
"There, now!" said Father to Frances. 
"Wasn’t it good?"
"Well," said Frances, "I traded it to Albert."
"For what?" said Father.
"Bread and jam," said Frances.
The next morning at breakfast Father sat down and said, "Now I call that a pretty sight!
Fresh orange juice and poached eggs on toast.
There’s a proper breakfast for you!"
"Thank you for saying so," said Mother.
"Poached eggs on toast do have a cheery look, I think."
Frances began to sing a poached-egg song:
Poached eggs on toast, why do you shiver With such  a funny little quiver?
Then she looked down and saw that she did not have a poached egg.
"I have no poached egg," said Frances.
"I have nothing but orange juice."
"I know," said Mother.
"Why is that?" said Frances.
"Everybody else has a poached egg.
Even Gloria has a poached egg and she is nothing but a baby."
"But you do not like eggs," said Mother, "and that is why I did not poach one for you.
Have some bread and jam if you are hungry."
So Frances ate bread and jam and went to school.
When the bell rang for lunch Frances sat down next to her friend Albert.
"What do you have today?" said Frances.
"I have a cream cheese-cucumber-and-tomato sandwich on rye bread," said Albert. 
"And a pickle to go with it.
And a hard-boiled egg and a little cardboard shaker of salt to go with that. 
And a thermos bottle of milk.
And a bunch of grapes and a tangerine.
And a cup custard and a spoon to eat it with.
What do you have?"
Frances opened her lunch. 
"Bread and jam," she said, "and milk."
"You’re lucky," said Albert. 
"That’s just what you like.
You don’t have to trade now."
"That’s right," said Frances. 
"And I had bread and jam for dinner last night and for breakfast this morning."
"You certainly are lucky," said Albert.
"Yes," said Frances. 
"I am a very lucky girl, I guess.
But I’ll trade you if you want to."
"That’s all right," said Albert.
"I like cream cheese with cucumbers and tomatoes on rye." 
Albert took two napkins from his lunch box.
He tucked one napkin under his chin.
He spread the other one on his desk like a tablecloth.
He arranged his lunch neatly on the napkin.
With his spoon he cracked the shell of the hard-boiled egg.
He peeled away the shell and bit off the end of the egg.
He sprinkled salt on the yolk and set the egg down again.
He unscrewed his thermos-bottle cup and filled it with milk.
Then he was ready to eat his lunch.
He took a bite of sandwich, a bite of pickle, a bite of hard-boiled egg, and a drink of milk.
Then he sprinkled more salt on the egg and went around again.
Albert made the sandwich, the pickle, the egg, and the milk come out even.
He ate his bunch of grapes and his tangerine.
Then he cleared away the crumpled-up waxed paper, the eggshell, and the tangerine peel.
He set the cup custard in the middle of the napkin on his desk.
He took up his spoon and ate up all the custard.
Then Albert folded up his napkins and put them away.
He put away his cardboard saltshaker and his spoon.
He screwed the cup on top of his thermos bottle.
He shut his lunch box, put it back inside his desk, and sighed.
"I like to have a good lunch," said Albert.
Frances ate her bread and jam and drank her milk.
Then she went out to the playground and skipped rope.
She did not skip as fast and she had skipped in the morning, and she sang:
Jam in the morning, jam at noon,
Bread and jam by the light of the moon.
Jam . . . is . . . very . . . nice.
When Frances got home from school, Mother said, "I know you like to have a little snack when you get home from school, ’and I have one all ready for you."
"I do like snacks!" said Frances, running to the kitchen.
"Here it is," said Mother.
"A glass of milk and some nice bread and jam for you.
"Aren’t you worried that maybe I will get sick and all my teeth will fall out from eating so much bread and jam?" asked Frances.
I don’t think that will happen for quite a while," said Mother.
"So eat it all up and enjoy it."
Frances ate up most of her bread and jam, but she did not eat all of it.
After her snack she went outside to skip rope.
Frances skipped a little more slowly than she had skipped at noon, and she sang:
Jam for snacks and jam for meals, I know how a jam jar feels-
FULL . . . OF . . . JAM!
That evening for dinner Mother cooked spaghetti and meatballs with tomato sauce.
"I am glad to see there will be enough for second helpings," said Father.
"Because spaghetti and meatballs is one of my favorite dishes."
"Spaghetti and meatballs is a favorite with everybody," said Mother.
"Try a little spaghetti, Gloria."
"Um," said Gloria, and tried the spaghetti.
Frances looked down at her plate and saw that there was no spaghetti and meatballs on it.
There was a slice of bread and a jar of jam.
Frances began to cry.
"My goodness!" said Mother. 
"Frances is crying!"
"What is the matter?" asked Father.
Frances looked down at her plate and sang a little sad song. 
She sang so softy that Mother and Father could scarcely hear her:
What I am
Is tired of jam.
"I want spaghetti and meatballs," said Frances.
"May I have some, please?"
"I had no idea you liked spaghetti and meatballs!" said Mother.
"How do you know what I’ll like if you won’t even try me?" asked Frances, wiping her eyes.
So Mother gave Frances spaghetti and meatballs, and she ate it all up.
The next day when the bell rang for lunch, Albert said, "What do you have today?"
"Well," said Frances, laying a paper doily on her desk and setting a tiny vase of violets in the middle of it, "let me see." 
She arranged her lunch on the doily.
"I have a thermos bottle with cream of tomato soup," she said.
"And a lobster-salad sandwich on thin slices of white bread.
I have celery, carrot sticks, and black olives, and a little cardboard shaker of salt for the celery.
And two plums and a tiny basket of cherries.
And vanilla pudding with chocolate sprinkles and a spoon to eat it with."
"That’s a good lunch," said Albert.
"I think it’s nice that there are all different kinds of lunches and breakfasts and dinners and snacks.
I think eating is nice."
"So do I," said Frances, and she made the lobster-salad sandwich, the celery, the carrot sticks, and the olives come out even.
The End

Title: Show Dog
Author: Meghan McCarthy
This is Princess.
She is a show dog.
Here we see her practicing for a dog show competition.
Notice the perfect posture.
Strong back
Perfect round puffy tail
Lean stomach
Groomed legs
Serious attitude, serious haircut
Shiny teeth (even though you can’t see them, believe me, they are)
Clean shampooed hair
Clipped nails
This is Ed.
He is a show dog too.
Look at his stage presence!
Dirt
Ferociously wagging tail
Favorite chewed bone
Mud
Scruffy
Brain which only thinks about chew toys, mud, food, tennis balls, and sometimes airplanes
Protruding tongue
Drool
Spittle
More dirt
Saliva-soaked ball
Okay, okay, so Ed isn’t a show dog.
But his family, the Hubbles, love him anyway . . .
Not a show dog
Uncombed
Mismatched earrings
Wild hair
Unshaven
Tacky glasses
Hole
 ice cream
Lopsided ponytail
Plastic jewelry
The Hubbles
One day, the Hubbles seen an ad in the newspaper.
County Fair Dog Show
Saturday 2:00 p.m.
Only the best dogs should enter, but beginners are welcome!
The Hubbles think Ed is the best dog ever.
Ed can . . .
spin in circles
get the newspaper
give big, wet kisses
He will make a great show dog.
"Show dog!
Your dog isn’t a show dog!" the Hubbles’ neighbor, Mr. Pitt, grumbles.
"My princess is a show dog.
That is a mangy mutt."
The Hubbles don’t listen.
After all, Ed has a very good chance of winning, don’t you think?
But they need to get Ed ready.
There’s just one problem . . . .
They’re not exactly sure what makes a dog a show dog.
So they decide to find out.
They watch Princess do tricks.
Sit up and beg
Roll over
Jump through hoops
Ed does tricks too.
Sit up and beg
Roll over
Jump through hoops
Princess eats champion dog food that makes her coat nice and shiny.
Ed does too.
Princess gets shampooed and groomed.
She looks very nice and pretty, indeed.
Ed gets shampooed and groomed too.
The long-awaited dog show competition arrives!
Ed and the Hubbles are very excited.
The dogs parade into the arena in a perfectly straight line.
Ed does too . . . sort of.
It’s time for the dogs to strut their stuff.
Mr. Pitt and Princess go first.
But Ed is a bit eager.
He thinks it’s time to play . . . .
"Watch out, Mr. Pitt!"
"Your dog has ruined the show!" shouts Mr. Pitt.
Of course, the Hubbles don’t listen.
They think Ed is a great dog.
He can still win, right?
Wrong!
The judge announces the winners.
Sheila the Shih Tzu wins third place.
Miss Lisa the Afghan Hound wins second, and Princess the Poodle wins first . . . but, hey!
Where is Princess?
Where is Ed?
Where are the Hubbles?
Where could they possibly be?
Out celebrating of course!
Princess deserves a festive first-place dinner.
And Ed does too, since he’s still the best dog ever.
At least the Hubbles think so.
Princess and Ed and the Hubbles now live happily every after.
Mr. Pitt does NOT live happily ever after, but that’s another story.

Title: George and Martha
Author: James Marshall
Five stories about two great friends
Story number one
Split pea soup
Martha was very fond of making split pea soup.
Sometimes she made it all day long.
Pots and pots of split pea soup.
If there was one thing that George was not fond of, it was split pea soup.
As a matter of fact, George hated split pea soup more than anything else in the world.
But it was so hard to tell Martha.
One day after George had eaten ten bowls of Martha’s soup, he said to himself, " I just can’t stand another bowl.
Not even another spoonful."
So, while Martha was out in the kitchen, George carefully poured the rest of his soup into his loafers under the table.
"Now she will think I have eaten it."
But Martha was watching from the kitchen.
"How do you expect to walk home with your loafers full of split pea soup?" she asked George.
"Oh dear," said George.
"You saw me."
"And why didn’t you yell me that you hate my split pea soup?"
"I didn’t want to hurt your feelings," said George.
"That’s silly," said Martha.
"Friends should always tell each other the truth.
As a matter of fact, I don’t like split pea soup very much myself.
I only like to make it.
From now on, you’ll never have to eat that awful soup again."
"What a relief!" George sighed.
"Would you like some chocolate chip cookies instead?" asked Martha.
"Oh, that would be lovely," said George.
"Then you shall have them," said his friend.
Story Number Two
The Flying Machine
"I’m going to be the first of my species to fly!" said George.
"They why aren’t you flying?" asked Martha.
"It seems to me that you are still on the ground."
"You are right," said George.
"I don’t seem to be going anywhere at all."
"Maybe the basket is too heavy," said Martha.
"Yes," said George, "I think you are right again.
Maybe if I climb out, the basket will be lighter."
"Oh dear!" cried George.
"Now what have I done?
There goes my flying machine!"
"That’s all right," said Martha.
"I would rather have you down here with me."
Story number three
George was fond of peeking in windows.
One day George peeked in on Martha.
He never did that again.
"We are friends," said Martha.
"But there is such a thing as privacy!"
Story number four
The mirror
"How I love to look at myself in the mirror," said Martha.
Every chance she got, Martha looked at herself in the mirror.
Sometimes Martha even woke up during the night to look at herself.
"The is fun."
She giggled.
But George was getting tired of watching Martha look at herself in the mirror.
One day, George pasted a silly picture he had drawn of Martha onto the mirror.
What a scare it gave Martha.
"Oh dear!" she cried.
"What has happened to me?"
"That’s what happens when you look at yourself too much in the mirror," said George.
"Then I won’t do it ever again," said Martha.
And she didn’t.
The last story
The tooth
One day when George was skating to Martha’s house, he tripped and fell.
And he broke off his right front tooth.
His favorite tooth too.
When he got to Martha’s, George cried his eyes out.
"Oh dear me!" he cried.
"I look so funny without my favorite tooth!"
"There, there," said Martha.
The next day George went to the dentist.
The dentist replaced George’s missing tooth with a lovely gold one.
When Martha saw George’s lovely new golden tooth, she was very happy.
"George!" she exclaimed.
"You look so handsome and distinguished with your new tooth!"
And George was happy too.
"That’s what friends are for," he said.
"They always look on the bright side and they always know how to cheer you up."
"But they also tell you the truth," said Martha with a smile.

Title: Miss Rumphius
Author: Barbara Cooney
The Lupine Lady lives in a small house overlooking the sea.
In between the rocks around her house grow blue and purple and rose-colored flowers.
The Lupine Lady is little and old.
But she has not always been that way.
I know.
She is my great-aunt, and she told me so.
Once upon a time she was a little girl named Alice, who lived in a city by the sea.
From the front stoop she could see the wharves and the bristling masts of tall ships.
Many years ago her grandfather had come to America on a large sailing ship.
Now he worked in the shop at the bottom of the house, making figureheads for the prows of ships, and carving Indians out of wood to put in front of cigar stores.
For Alice’s grandfather was an artist.
He pained pictures, too, of sailing ships and places across the sea.
When he was very busy, Alice helped him put in the skies.
In the evening Alice sat on her grandfather’s knee and listened to his stories of faraway places.
When he had finished, Alice would say, "When I grow up, I too will go to faraway places, and when I grow old, I too will live beside the sea."
"That is all very well, little Alice," said her grandfather, "but there is a third thing you must do. "
"What is that?" asked Alice.
"You must do something to make the world more beautiful," said her grandfather.
"All right," said Alice.
But she did not know what that could be.
In the meantime Alice got up and washed her face and ate porridge for breakfast. 
She went to school and came home and did her homework.
And pretty soon she was grown up.
Then my Great-aunt Alice set out to do the three things she had told her grandfather she was going to do.
She left home and went to live in another city far from the sea and the salt air.
There she worked in a library, dusting books and keeping them from getting mixed up, and helping people find the ones they wanted.
Some of the books told her about faraway places.
People called her Miss Rumphius now.
Sometimes she went to the conservatory in the middle of the park.
When she stepped inside on a wintry day, the warm moist air wrapped itself around her, and the sweet smell of jasmine filled her nose.
"This is almost like a tropical isle," said Miss Rumphius.
"But not quite."
So Miss Rumphius went to a real tropical island, where people kept cockatoos and monkeys as pets.
She walked on long beaches, picking up beautiful shells.
One day she met the Bapa Raja, king of a fishing village.
"You must be tired, " he said.
"Come into my house and rest. "
So Miss Rumphius went in and met the Bapa Raja’s wife.
The Bapa Raja himself fetched a green coconut and cut a slice off the top so that Miss Rumphius could drink the coconut water inside.
Before she left, the Bapa Raja gave her a beautiful mother-of-pearl shell on which he had painted a bird of paradise and the words, "You will always remain in my heart."
"You will always remain in mine too," said Miss Rumphius.
My great-aunt Miss Alice Rumphius climbed tall mountains where the snow never melted.
She went through jungles and across deserts.
She saw lions playing and kangaroos jumping.
And everywhere she made friends she would never forget.
Finally she came to the Land of the Lotus-Eaters, and there, getting off a camel, she hurt her back.
"What a foolish thing to do," said Miss Rumphius.
"Well, I have certainly seen faraway places.
Maybe it is time to find my place by the sea."
And it was, and she did.
From the Porch of her new house Miss Rumphius watched the sun come up; she watched it cross the heavens and sparkle on the water; and she saw it set in glory in the evening.
She started a little garden among the rocks that surrounded her house, and she planted a few flower seeds in the stony ground.
Miss Rumphius was almost perfectly happy.
"But there is still one more thing I have to do," she said.
"I have to do something to make the world more beautiful."
But what?
"The world already is pretty nice," she thought, looking out over the ocean.
The next spring Miss Rumphius was not very well.
Her back was bothering her again, and she had to stay in bed most of the time.
The flowers she had planted the summer before had come up and bloomed in spite of the stony ground.
She could see them from her bedroom window, blue and purple and rose-colored.
"Lupines," said Miss Rumphius with satisfaction.
"I have always loved lupines the best.
I wish I could plant more seeds this summer so that I could have still more flowers next year."
But she was not able to.
After a hard winter spring came.
Miss Rumphius was feeling much better.
Now she could take walks again.
One afternoon she started to go up and over the hill, where she had not been in a long time.
"I don’t believe my eyes!" she cried when she got to the top.
For there on the other side of the hill was a large patch of blue and purple and rose-colored lupines!
"It was the wind," she said as she knelt in delight.
"It was the wind that brought the seeds from my garden here!
 And the birds must have helped!"
Then Miss Rumphius had a wonderful ideal
She hurried home and got out her seed catalogues.
She sent off to the very best seed house for five bushels of lupine seed.
All that summer Miss Rumphius, her pockets full of seeds, wandered over fields and headlands, sowing lupines.
She scattered seeds along the highways and down the country lanes.
She flung handfuls of them around the schoolhouse and back of the church.
She tossed them into hollows and along stone walls.
Her back didn’t hurt her any more at all.
Now some people called her That Crazy Old Lady.
The next spring there were lupines everywhere.
Fields and hillsides were covered with blue and purple and rose-colored flowers.
They bloomed along the highways and down the lanes.
Bright patches lay around the schoolhouse and back of the church.
Down in the hollows and along the stone walls grew the beautiful flowers.
Miss Rumphius had done the third, the most difficult thing of all!
My Great-aunt Alice, Miss Rumphius, is very old now.
Her hair is very white.
Every year there are more and more lupines.
Now they call her the Lupine Lady.
Sometimes my friends stand with me outside her gate, curious to see the old, old lady who planted the fields of lupines.
When she invites us in, they come slowly.
They think she is the oldest woman in the world.
Often she tells us stories of faraway places.
"When I grow up," I tell her, "I too will go to faraway places and come home to live by the sea."
"That is all very well, little Alice," says my aunt, "but there is a third thing you must do."
"What is that?" I ask.
"You must do something to make the world more beautiful."
"All right," I say.
But I do not know yet what that can be.

Title: The Gardener
Author: Sarah Stewart
August 27, 1935
Dear Uncle Jim,
Grandma told us after supper that you want me to come to the city and live with you until things get better.
Did she tell you that Papa has been out of work for a long time, and no one asks Mama to make dresses anymore?
We all cried, even Papa.
But them Mama made us laugh with her stories about your chasing her up trees when you were both little.
Did you really do that?
I’m small, but strong, and I’ll help all I can.
However, Grandma said to finish my schoolwork before doing anything else.
Your niece,
Lydia Grace Finch
September 3, 1935
Dear Uncle Jim,
I’m mailing this from the train station.
I forgot to tell you in the last letter three important things that I’m too shy to say to your face:
1. I know a lot about gardening but nothing about baking.
2. I’m anxious to learn to bake, but is there any place to plant seeds?
3. I like to be called "Lydia Grace" - just like Grandma.
Your niece,
Lydia Grace Finch
On the train
September 4, 1935
Dear Mama,
I feel so pretty in your dress that you made over for me.
I hope you don’t miss it too much.
Dear Papa,
I haven’t forgotten what you said about recognizing Uncle Jim:
"Just look for Mama’s face with a big nose and a mustache!"
I promise not to tell him.
(Does he have a sense of humor?)
And, dearest Grandma,
Thank you for the seeds.
The train is rocking me to sleep, and every time I doze off, I dream of gardens.
Love to all,
Lydia Grace
September 5, 1935
Dear Mama and Papa and Grandma,
I’m so excited!!!
There are window boxes here!
They look as if they’ve been waiting for me, so now we’ll both wait for spring.
And, Grandma, the sun shines down on the corner where I’ll live and work.
Love to all,
Lydia Grace
P.S. Uncle Jim doesn’t smile.
December 25, 1935
Dear Mama, Papa and Grandma,
I adore the seed catalogues you sent for Christmas.
And, Grandma, thank you for all the bulbs.
I hope you received my drawings.
I wrote a long poem for Uncle Jim.
He didn’t smile, but I think he liked it.
He read it aloud, then put it in his shirt pocket and patted it.
Love to all,
Lydia Grace
February 12, 1936
Dearest Grandma,
Thank you again for those bulbs you sent at Christmas.
You should see them now!
I really like Ed and Emma Beech, Uncle Jim’s friends who work here.
When I first arrived, Emma told me she’d show me how to knead bread if would teach her the Latin names of all the flowers I know.
Now, just half a year later, I’m kneading bread and she’s speaking Latin!
More good news: We have a store cat named Otis who at this very moment is sleeping at the foot of my bed.
Love to all,
Lydia Grace
P.S. Uncle Jim isn’t smiling yet, but I’m hoping for a smile soon.
March 5, 1936
Dear Mama, Papa, and Grandma,
I’ve discovered a secret place.
You can’t imagine how wonderful it is.
No one else knows about it, but Otis.
I have great plans.
Thank you for all the letters.
I’ll try to write more, but I’m really busy planting all your seeds in cracked teacups and bent cake pans!
And Grandma, you should smell the good dirt I’m bringing home from the vacant lot down the street.
Love to all,
Lydia Grace
April 27, 1936
Dearest Grandma,
All the seeds and roots are sprouting.
I can hear you saying, "April showers bring May flowers."
Emma and I are sprucing up the bakery and I’m playing a great trick on Uncle Jim.
He sees me reading my mail, planting seeds in the window boxes, going to school, doing my homework, sweeping the floor.
But he never sees me working in my secret Place.
Love to all,
Lydia Grace
P.S. I’m planning on a big smile from Uncle Jim in the near future.
May 27, 1936
Dear Mama, Papa, and Grandma,
You should have heard Emma laugh today when I opened your letter and dirt fell out onto the sidewalk!
Thank you for all the baby plants.
They survived the trip in the big envelope.
More about Emma: She’s helping me with the secret place.
Hurrah!
Love to all,
Lydia Grace
P.S. I saw Uncle Jim almost smile today.
The store was full (well, almost full) of customers.
June 27, 1936
Dear Grandma,
Flowers are blooming all over the place.
I’m also growing radishes, onions, and three kinds of lettuce in the window boxes.
Some neighbors have brought containers for me to fill with flowers, and a few customers even gave me plants from their gardens this spring!
They don’t call me "Lydia Grace" anymore.
They call me "the gardener."
Love to all,
Lydia Grace
P.S. I’m sure Uncle Jim will smile soon.
I’m almost ready to show him the secret place.
July 4, 1936
Dearest Mama, Papa, and Grandma,
I am bursting with happiness!
The entire city seems so beautiful, especially this morning.
The secret place is ready for Uncle Jim.
At noon, the store will close for the holiday, and then we’ll bring him up to the roof.
I’ve tried to remember everything you ever taught me about beauty.
Love to all,
Lydia Grace
P.S. I can already imagine Uncle Jim’s smile.
You’ve arrived
Please go up
July 11, 1936
Dear Mama, Papa, and Grandma,
My heart is pounding so hard I’m sure the customers can hear it downstairs!
At lunch today, Uncle Jim put the "Closed" sign on the door and told Ed and Emma and me to go upstairs and wait.
He appeared with the most amazing cake I’ve ever seen – covered in flowers!
I truly believe that cake equals one thousand smiles.
And then he took your letter out of his pocket with the news of Papa’s job!
I’m coming home!
Love to all, and see you soon,
Lydia Grace
P.S. Grandma, I’ve given all of my plants to Emma.  
I can’t wait to help you in your garden again.
We gardeners never retire.

Title: The Hat
Author: Jan Brett
Winter was on the way.
Lisa took her woolen clothes out of the chest and carried them outside.
She was hanging them up in the fresh air, when a strong wind blew one of her stockings off the line.
Curious Hedgie found it and poked his nose in.
When he pulled it out, the stocking was stuck on his prickles.
"How embarrassing," Hedgie thought.
The mother hen came by with her chicks.
"Cackle, cackle," she clucked, and laughed.
"What’s that on your head, Hedgie?"
"Why, it’s me new hat," he told her.
"Isn’t it beautiful?"
The mother hen cocked her head as if she had an idea.
And off she ran.
Hedgie saw the noisy gander looking down at him.
"Honk, honk!
Ho, ho, ho!" the gander laughed.
"Look at that!
The hedgehog has flipped his gizzard."
"Laugh today, Gander.
But tomorrow when it rains, my hat will keep me dry."
The gander thought for a moment.
And off he ran.
The barn cat was watching from a tree as Hedgie tugged at the stocking.
"Meow," he called down.
"What a silly-looking hedgehog you are, with that thing on your head."
"But my ears will be warm in a snowstorm."
"Hmmmmm," purred the cat.
And off he ran.
The farm dog and her puppies found Hedgie in a patch of brambles.
"Hedgie, is that a hat you’re wearing?
How funny you look," she barked, and her puppies yelped and giggled.
"But I’ll be cozy and dry when it snows," Hedgie said.
The farm dog’s ears perked up.
And off she ran.
"Oink, oink!" the piglets squealed.
"What are you up to, Hedgie?" the mama pig asked.
"Making sure my hat doesn’t fall off if an icy wind blows up."
"I see," said the mama pig.
And off she ran.
"Hedgie, what is that ridiculous thing on your head?" the pony snorted at Hedgie.
That was the last straw.
"It’s my hat, of course.
Don’t you know that everyone should wear a hat in the winter when it’s cold and snowy!" Hedgie shouted.
The pony looked startled.
Hedgie was usually so friendly.
And off he ran.
Hedgie just wanted to be alone.
He was tired of everyone laughing at him, and with this thing on his head, he wouldn’t even fit in his den.
He didn’t see Lisa running after him, the other stocking in her hand.
"Come back, you silly hedgehog," she called.
"Oh, no," Hedgie thought.
"Even the girl is laughing at me!"
Lisa caught up and pulled her stocking off Hedgie’s head.
"You ridiculous little hedgehog," she laughed.
"Don’t you know that animals don’t wear clothes!"
Hedgie headed for his den, and Lisa started back toward the clothesline.
That’s when she saw all of her missing woolens.
The animals had taken them and each one was thinking, "Now I am wearing a magnificent hat!"
Lisa was still chasing them when Hedgie reached his den.
"How ridiculous they look!
Don’t they know that animals should never wear clothes!"

Title: Arnie the Doughnut
Author: Lourie Keller
Arnie turned out to be just the kind of doughnut he hoped he’s be – chocolate-covered with bright-colored candy sprinkles.
Look at all my sprinkles – there must be a million of them!
Actually, there are only 135, but I’m not going to spoil it for him.
He was made very early in the morning at the Downtown Bakery – "Home of the Best Doughnuts A-‘Round’!"
Arnie was proud to be one of the best.
He knew that people all over town made special trips to his bakery to buy doughnuts of their very own.
Get it?
A-Round??
We’re round.
Give me a minute – I’m good at these.
As Arnie sat on the tray, which had just been placed in the doughnut case, he took a moment to reflect on the amazing things that had happened to him that morning.
I remember that . . . .
1. cut into ring
2. deep-fried
3. cooled
4. iced
5. sprinkled
6. named
Ringy-dingy doughnut-making thingy
Wheeeee!
Ouch!
Quit it!
I’m soaking in boiling grease, but I love it!
Your drink, sir.
Thanks.
Who’s that handsome doughnut?
Hold still.
That tickles!
Caution sprinkle area – must wear safety goggles.
Whatever I’m named, I’m going to go by "cool iced-D"
I like it
Arnie
Arlene
Arnie looked around and saw all sorts of doughnuts sitting nearby.
Crullers
(French)
Monjour, madame.
(plain)
Howdy, Frenchy!
Powdered
Oh dear, I’m so greasy.
The extremely rare square doughnut
Chocolate zebra
Long John
I prefer "Long Jonathan"
Doughnut holes
Hello Long John!
Jelly-filled
EEEOOO! His brains are oozing out!
It’s not brains, silly - it’s jelly!
Double checking
OOO is it brain?
Nah, it’s Jelly.
Cinnamon twist
Éclair
Iced chocolate
Plain
You know, a little blue icing would be fabulous on you!
Cream-filled
Bear claw
He tried to strike up a conversation with an apple fritter on the next tray over, but she didn’t seem to want to talk.
Glazed
Apple fritter
How ‘bout that deep fryer? . . .
Any relation to Larry Fritter? . . .
Want to count my sprinkles?
"It us rather early.
Maybe she’s not a morning doughnut," Arnie supposed.
Various muffins
Steel-belted radial doughnut
Okay, now I get it . . . round
It was 6 a.m. and the baker had just hung the open sign in the window.
Arnie was fascinated as he watched customers stream into the bakery.
One by one, doughnuts were chosen, placed in paper bags, and whisked away with their new owners.
Some went by the dozen in giant boxes.
RRRR- must be a day-old doughnut
Must . . .have . . . doughnuts
Oh she – he gives me the heavy end.
I’ve been sent to collect the tasty, fried, sweet crystal-coated cake disks.
Is this the proper coordinate?
Number 105!
"Good-bye!" Arnie yelled to each doughnut.
"Have a great trip!"
Do you promise to love, honor and cherish this doughnut until the very last bite?
I do.
Look, Grandma – this one matches your dress!
Doughnuts make good wheel.
"This is so exciting! I wonder who will choose me?"
Just them, Arnie looked up and saw a man pointing right at him!
Moi?
"Moi" (pronounced "mwah") is the French word for "me."
He learned it from moi.
Before he could say another word, he was pulled form the tray and placed in a paper bag of his very own.
Good-bye, everyone!
"Thank you, Mr. Bing.
Have a nice day!"
Arnie heard the baker say to the man.
Mr. Bing . . . that’s a fine name," Arnie decided.  
"I can hardly wait to meet him!"
Good-bye Arnie!
We’ll miss you!
Arnie
I should have talked to him while I had the chance.
(the grand exit that Arnie’s imagining)
The ride to Mr. Bing’s apartment was a little bumpy.
Arnie was grateful for the soft napkin the baker had so thoughtfully placed underneath him in the bag.
Jump!
You’re outta there!
Bumps
More Bumps
Bumpy Humps
He had never ridden in a car and wished he could look out the window to see all the sights.
Nut more than anything, he wished he could meet Mr. Bing.
"Why does he keep me in this bag?" Arnie wondered.
Grump on a stump
Get those words off my lawn!
Clumps of bumps
Bumps and lumps
Finally, the car came to a stop and they were home.
Mr. Bing carefully removed Arnie from his paper bag and placed him on a clean, shiny plate.
"What a handsome plate," Arnie said to himself.
"I’m not crazy about the design – I prefer a more modern look.
But it’s nothing a little paint can’t fix."
Chocolate Milk
Mr. Bing gently lifted Arnie from his new plate.
"Isn’t that cute?" thought Arnie, as he closed his eyes and smiled.
"He wants to hold me."
As Arnie relaxed in Mr. Bing’s hand, he felt himself moving higher and higher away from his plate.
When he opened his eyes to see where he was going, he discovered that he was headed straight for Mr. Bing’s open mouth!
"What are you doing?" shouted Arnie.
Mr. Bing was stunned.
He dropped Arnie back onto the plate.
"I was going to . . . eat you," he replied in shock.
"EAT ME?" Arnie shrieked, his sprinkles flying everywhere.
"Why would you do a thing like that?
Do you make a habit of eating all your houseguests?"
"Nnnno . . . of course not."
"So, why then did it suddenly occur to you to eat ME?" Arnie demanded.
"Well . . . because . . . you’re a doughnut.
That’s what doughnuts are for – to eat.
"Do you mean to tell me you’ve done this before?"
"Yes . . . I eat a doughnut every day," Mr. Bing said sheepishly.
Arnie froze.
He felt sick and frightened and angry!
Ugggh!
I’d better get out of here before he tries to eat me again!
Well, That explains why my friends never write or call - they’ve probably all been EATEN!
He thought to himself for a moment.
"I must put a stop to this right away!
I’ll call the bakery and warn the others.
Whoever’s LEFT, that is!"
Arnie knew that there was no time to waste and that he needed to be very sneaky in order to keep his plan from Mr. Bing.
He turned to Mr. Bing and said in his sweetest voice, "Excuse me, sir, but I don’t believe we’ve been properly introduced.  
My name is Arnie.
"Um . . . hello . . . Arnie," Mr. Bing stammered.
It’s nice to eat you – I mean meet you."
"Mr. Bing, would you be a dear and allow me to use your telephone?"
Arnie asked extra politely.
"Oh . . . well . . . okay," said Mr. Bing, and he handed Arnie the phone.
As quickly as he could, Arnie dialed the number of the bakery.
(still shocked to actually be talking to a doughnut!)
The baker answered the phone.
"Downtown Bakery, home of the best"
"Mr. Baker Man!" Arnie frantically whispered.
"This is Arnie the doughnut.
Do you remember me?
You made me at 5:15 this morning, and I was bought about twenty minutes ago by a man who goes by the name of Br. Bing."
"Yes, Arnie," the baker answered.
‘What can I do for you?"
"Now, I don’t want to alarm you, but just moments ago, that man tried to eat me!
And not only that – he claims to have eaten hundreds of us!
I’m going to make a run for it, but I wanted to warn you so that if you see him coming into the bakery again, you can stop him!"
"Oh my, Arnie-I thought you understood.
That’s why I make doughnuts . . . for people to eat."
"I CAN’T BELIEVE IT!" Arnie gasped.
"Are the other doughnuts aware of this arrangement?"
"well, I think so," the baker said.
"Let me ask them to make sure."
Showing signs of doughnut shock
Popped-up eyebrow sprinkles
Bugged-out eyeballs
Overall dazed expression
Severe sprinkle loss
Weak in the knees
Feels like someone punched a hole right through him
The baker yelled to the other doughnuts, "DO YOU DOUGHNUTS KNOW THAT YOU’RE GOING TO BE EATEN?"
"YES, we know!" the doughnuts shouted back.
"We’re DELICIOUS!"
We’re very popular!
People love us!
C’est magnifique
Try us for yourself!
Is he going a little kooky?
Kooky or cookie?
"Did you hear that Arnie?" the baker asked.
Arnie was crushed.
The phone dropped from his hand.
He’d heard all he needed to hear.
Arnie forgot all about his plan to escape.
He collapsed back onto the plate, glanced up at Mr. Bing, and muttered, "All right then, let’s get this over with.
Go ahead and eat me."
Mr. Bing gazed down at Arnie.  "I’m not going to eat you, Arnie," he said reassuringly.
"I just wouldn’t feel right about it now."
"REALLY?" Arnie said, with a huge sigh of relief.
"Well, I’m glad to see that you’ve come to your senses!"
"But since I’m not going to eat you," Mr. Bing continues, "I’ll have to figure our something else to do with you.
I paid good money for you – I don’t want to be wasteful."
"Of course not!" Arnie agreed.
"What we need to do is each make a list of things I can do with you instead of eating you.
Between the two of us, I know we’ll come up with something."
"Good plan, Mr. Bing!" Arnie said.
"This will be a breeze-I bet I’m good at lots of stuff!"
They both feverishly wrote down their ideas.
When they were finished, Mr. Bing asked, "Would you like to read yours first?"
"Sure thing, Mr. Bing!" Arnie answered.
"Things Mr. Bing can do with me instead of eating me"
"Do you need a ballroom dance partner?"
"No, I don’t dance."
"You could use a personal fitness trainer."
Drop and give me 20!
"Hmmmmm, I’d get too sweaty."
"How about a portrait painter?"
"oh, heavens no!"
"Would you like me to entertain at your parties?"
I wonder if he does weddings.
Doughnut make my brown eyes bluuuue . . .
He’s fabulous!
Wherever did you find him?
"I don’t like throwing parties."
"I could be your chauffeur."
Look out for that tree!
Relax.
"But you can’t see over the steering wheel."
"I’d make a great bodyguard!"
"Who could you protect me from – a cookie?"
That’s close enough, Ma’am.
"All righty, Mr. Bing.
Let’s hear what you came up with!"
"Okey-dokey," he replied.
"I just know you’ll like some of these."
"Things I can do with Arnie instead of eating him"
"I could use you as a pincushion."
Ouch!
"Ooooh, too painful."
"How about an air freshener for my car?"
Hi Arnie – you smell good enough to eat!
"How about not?"
"Would you like to be a picture frame?"
"I don’t imagine so."
"I need a new bowling ball."
"Well, don’t look at me!"
Yea, Arnie!
"You’d make a fine paperweight.
Keep up the good work, Arnie!
"BORING!"
"Hat about a doorstop?"
Thanks, Arnie!
"Try again."
But there was nothing else on Mr. Bing’s list.
They were both completely out of ideas.
Arnie and Mr. Bing were exhausted.  
They felt terribly disappointed.
After a few minutes of awkward silence, Mr. Bing finally spoke.
"I’m sorry, Arnie- but it’s clear that we can’t agree on anything for you to do around here.
This is difficult for me to say, but I think it would be best if you found another home."
"I know," said Arnie, fighting back tears.
"I’ll just be on my way then.
Is it all right if I keep this napkin to pack up all my loose sprinkles?
"Of course," Mr. Bing replied sadly.
"As soon as I get a job, I’ll pay you back the money you spent on me."
"That’s not necessary, Arnie."
Good-bye Arnie- we’ve got some lovely parting gifts for you.
Arnie shook Mr. Bing’s hand and thanked him for his kindness.
Mr. Bing opened the door, and as Arnie left he paused and said, "I guess doughnuts really are only good for eating, aren’t they?"
They both waved good-bye and Arnie was gone.
Mr. Bing stood at the window and watched as Arnie walked away.
He walked past the flower beds, the mailboxes, and the apartment manager’s office.
You can have my limited-time offer for an interest-free credit card.
No mail for me.
Office
Now leasing
Is there anything worse than a sad pastry?
Remember how happy I was at the beginning of the story?
I can’t read, but you sure looked happy.
He passed the tennis court, the swimming pool, and the clubhouse.
But when Arnie reached the NO DOGS ALLOWED sign at the end of the driveway, Mr. Bing suddenly came up with a new idea.
Oopsie!
Sometimes life feels like a big bonk on the head.
Technically, I’m food - so I guess a quick dip in the pool is out.
No food in pool area.
Is that a doughnut?
Yeah, whatever, anyway, about my trip abroad. . .
No dogs allowed
Bye, Arnie
(the fastest Mr. Bing’s moved in years)
"Arnie!
Arnie!
Wait up!" yelled Mr. Bing as he ran after him.
Arnie turned back and stopped.
When Mr. Bing caught up with him, he was out of breath.
"I can’t believe I didn’t think of this earlier!" Mr. Bing panted.
"Arnie, I’ve always wanted a dog and could never have one because they’re not allowed here.
But there’s no sign that says: NO DOUGHNUTS ALLOWED."
Arnie perked up when he realized that Mr. Bing was thinking.
Keep talkin’ big guy.
NO DOGS ALLOWED
Would you like to take walks and play fetch?" Mr. Bing asked excitedly.
"You bet I would!"
"Can you do tricks, like rolling over?"
"Rolling over?
LOOK AT ME- I was MADE For rolling over!"
"Well, then, there’s only one thing left to ask.
Arnie, will you be my doughnut-dog?"
"Oh, Mr. Bing- I would LOVE to be your doughnut-dog!"
It’s a WACKY idea, but it just might work!
From that moment on, Arnie and Mr. Bing were inseparable.
Arnie liked being a doughnut-dog even better than he liked being a doughnot.
Get it, Arnie!
Take pine.
Pet groomers
Bye Arnie!
Buy Mr. Bing!
I got the DELUXE package!
He went through a short phase of chewing on furniture and barking at the mailman, but after a crash course in obedience school, he graduated first in his class.
Everywhere the two of them went, people would stop to pet Arnie.
No one had ever seen a doughnut-dog before.
Congratulations Arnie!
Is that a doughnut-dog?
What a darling man.
What a darling dog!
You’re so sticky, yes you are.
I love that Arnie.
Got a napkin?
Arnie and Mr. Bing had so much fun together.
Arnie was the best pet Mr. Bing could ever have hoped for – and Mr. Bing was Arnie’s best friend.
Beware of Doughnut.

Title: When Dinosaurs came with everything
Author: Elise Broach
Friday is errand day.
My mom goes on boring errands, and I have to go with her.
And this Friday seemed like every other Friday . . . until we got to the bakery.
A sign above the doughnuts read: Buy a dozen get a dinosaur.
I couldn’t believe my eyes. 
Neither could my mom.
"They must mean a toy," she said.
But when I took the box of doughnuts, the lady behind the counter said, "Hold on, little guy. 
Don’t forget your dinosaur."
And there he was!
"Mom!" I yelled.
It was a triceratops.
"What!" cried my mom. 
She did not look happy.
"How are we supposed to get that home?"
The bakery lady smiled. 
"Oh, don’t worry, he’ll follow you.
They always do."
And he did . . . all the way to the doctor’s office, where I had to go for my checkup.
My mom shook her head. 
"What are we going to do with him now?" 
She looked him up and down.
That took a while.
"We can’t bring him inside," she said finally.
"He’ll have to stay in the parking lot."
I told him not to talk to strangers.
After my checkup, I asked for a sticker, like usual.
"No stickers today," said the nurse. 
"Just dinosaurs. 
With a shot, you get two."
The nurse smiled.
"Not today, buddy.
But you can pick up your dinosaur at the front desk."
"Mom!" I yelled. 
There, at the front desk, was a stegosaurus.
"What on earth is going on?" my mom cried.
"It’s a special day," the nurse explained.
"Today, dinosaurs come with everything!"
"Yessss!" I said.
"Noooo," my mom groaned.
We walked down the street, and my triceratops and my stegosaurus walked right behind us.
THUD, THUD, THUD.
They made friends right away.
Across the street, other kids had dinosaurs too. 
I saw an ankylosaur, a duckbill, and a velociraptor. 
We all waved at each other. 
Our mothers glared and kept on walking.
"I think we’d better go home right now," my mom said.
"But what about my haircut? 
The barber’s waiting for me."
My mom looked at the dinosaurs. 
Then she looked at my bangs.
"The barber always gives you a balloon, doesn’t he?
 A nice balloon?"
"Uh-huh," I said.
I didn’t want a balloon.
I wanted a barosaur.
At the barbershop, I gave my triceratops and my stegosaurus doughnuts for a snack. 
They waited outside and watched through the glass.
The barber pumped the chair up high. 
He cut my hair too short, but I didn’t mind, because then he patted my head and said, "Wait right here, sport.’"
He was gone for a long time. 
My mom tapped her foot. 
"I don’t like this," she said. 
"Where exactly do they keep the balloons?"
Just then, the barber came back with something flying over his head.
It wasn’t a balloon.
"Mom!" I yelled. 
It was a pterosaur.
"This is too much," my mom protested.
"Now, listen," she said to the barber. 
"I think a balloon will do just fine today. 
Don’t you have any balloons?"
Sorry, lady.
 No balloons. 
You get one of these instead."
It was like that everywhere we went.
At the shoe store, the sign read: BUY TWO PAIR, GET DINOSAUR FREE!
My mom decided my shoes would last a while longer.
At the theater, we could hear the popcorn man shouting, "Butter? 
No butter? 
You want a dinosaur with that?"
My mom said we’d go to the movies another day.
At the diner, I wanted to stop for a hamburger.
But then a girl walked out with a Tyrannosaurus rex.
"Okay, that’s it!" my mom cried. 
"We are definitely not having lunch there."
She looked at my triceratops, my stegosaurus, and my pterosaur.
"What are we supposed to do with all of these dinosaurs? 
We don’t have room for them! 
We can’t take care of them!"
I hugged her leg. 
"Don’t worry, Mom. 
They can live in the backyard!"
My mom shook her head. 
"Sweetheart, they’re not toys.
Dinosaurs are a lot of work."
"But, Mom, look! 
They eat anything. 
And they sleep outside.
I’ll do everything, I promise. 
Please, Mom? 
Please?" My mom sighed.
"Well, I suppose we can’t just leave them here. 
Thank heavens we didn’t stop at the diner."
We hurried home, and my dinosaurs hurried after us.
THUD, THUD, THUD.
FLAP, FLAP, FLAP.
When we were almost there, we saw a little duckbill dinosaur, standing alone on the street corner.
He looked lost.
"Mom, that’s a baby hardosaur.
He’s all by himself!"
"Sweetie, we’ve already got our hands full."
The hadrosaur followed us.
It wasn’t my fault.
When we got home, my mom needed to lie down, so I made lunch for the dinosaurs.
Then I showed them where to go to the bathroom.
I told them to stay out of the neighbor’s yard because of his mean dog.
And I showed them my slide, my tire swing, and all the toys in the garage.
They seemed to be having fun, but they really went wild when I took out my Frisbee.
The hadrosaur had the first throw. 
The Frisbee landed on the roof. 
I saw my mom watching from the window.
"Is everything all right out there?" she asked.
"Everything’s fine, Mom. 
We can get it down." 
And my pterosaur flew up and plucked the Frisbee out of the gutter.
My mom kept watching.
She looked at him for a long time.
The next thing I knew, she had him cleaning the gutters!
Then she came out to the backyard with a pile of wet clothes.
"These spikes come in handy, don’t they," she said.
Pretty soon, my mom had thought of chores for all of my dinosaurs.
But I knew they didn’t mind. 
It just meant they were part of the family.
When we were finished helping, my mom said I could invite some friends over.
It was a bring-your-own-dinosaur party!
And guess what happened next?
I heard my mom on the phone to the bakery.
She asked, "Do you have any doughnuts left?"
And that’s when I knew everything would be just fine.

Title: Train
Author: Elisha Cooper
The train leaves in minutes. 
Passengers buy tickets and rush across the floor to where the train is humming on its tracks.
Conductors look up the platform. 
They check their watches.
One minute. Hats wave, whistles blow. 
"All aboard!" Not all.
A passenger jumps on at the last second. 
The doors whoosh shut.
The train pulls out of the station . . ..  and out of the city. 
The train is a red-striped Commuter Train. 
The conductor swings down the aisle, shouts, "Tickets please!" and snaps holes in the tickets with his punch.
The train clatters past ball fields and bridges, past backyards and ponds. 
Main streets flash by. 
The view changes every second. 
Hello town, good-bye town. 
On to the next town.
The Commuter Train slows with creaking brakes. 
Announcements crackle. 
Some words get lost: "We are arriving at Ghblighrrfzze." 
The train stops at a small station. 
Passengers off, passengers on.
As the Commuter Train waits, another train roars past on another track. 
A larger train.
A bright blue Passenger Train hurrying between cities.
The train is late so up in the cab of the engine, the engineer pulls back the throttle.
The Passenger Train powers forward. 
It hurtles past barns and farmhouses. 
The engine is so big it makes other big things look small.
The engineer sits very still but his fingers are always moving. 
Pushing levers, turning dials. 
He taps a blue button -long, long, short, long-and the horn blares out across a valley of fields and steeples. 
As the train approaches a rail crossing, it sounds like a storm. 
As the train passes, it sounds like dropped pots and pans.
As the train leaves, it sounds like the da dum da dum of a beating heart.
Then, silence. 
But up ahead the Passenger Train keeps going, thundering into the outskirts of a Midwestern city filled with smokestacks and factories and belching steam. 
Tracks weave in and out. 
Small animals scurry under the tracks.
The Passenger Train crawls over the tracks through a jungle of gravel, wires, and dirt. 
Everything smells of grease and rust and burnt toast. 
The train lurches up to the station. 
Bells ring, doors open. 
Passengers off, passengers on. 
Tall men with red caps unload luggage and wheel it through the echoing hall.
In the rail yard next to the station, another train works. 
An orange Freight Train loading up. 
It grumbles under its breath as railcars are hauled and hitched to its back.
The railcars are filled with steel, concrete, oil, wheat, corn, and lumber. 
Things used to make other things. 
Sturdy things. 
All crammed in containers the color of tomatoes and eggs.
Thick white letters cover the railcar sides. 
Graffiti paints their sides, too. 
After the railcars are linked into one long train, the Freight Train creeps out of the city and across the Great Plains.
It rolls past wheat and prairie grasses.
Past silos and barbed wire.
Past a lone hawk circling under a big western sky.
The Freight train rolls slower than slow.
So slow it’s hard to tell it’s moving.
As if the train and the clouds above were having a race to see which can go slower.
Slow, sloooow.
And like the clouds, the train does not stop even as it inches up among low hills.
Then, another train passes.
A dark green Overnight Train switchbacking westward.
It climbs over the Rocky Mountains through snow flurries and pine forests.
The train curves along icy rivers and shoots through tunnels (where its chatter turns into a whisper). 
There are no roads outside.
Just eagles, elk, and turkeys.
As the sun lowers, passengers gather in the dining car, where the waiter sways down the aisle with her tray.
She doesn’t spill a thing.
Plates of meat loaf, potatoes, ice cream, and pie.
A movable feast.
In the sleeping car, two girls unfold seats into beds and make the room their own. 
Little sink, little shower. 
Everything little. 
The girls sleep as the train curls through the mountains and into the night.
The moon rises.
Wherever the train goes, the moon follows.
When the train stops, the moon stops.
When the train starts, the moon starts.
Sometimes it hides behind a ridge.
Then-hello friend- reappears. 
The train rests in small towns.
Passengers off, passengers on.
Stars blink in the cold air, lights blink on the horizon, and the Overnight Train pushes into the deep hours of the night and wakes to morning sun.
Passengers wake to biscuits, butter, jam, and coffee.
Outside, everything is different.
Mountains have turned into orchards, snow into grass, boulders into cattle. 
Now, accelerating into view across a wide green valley, one last train passes.
A sleek and white High-Speed Train, blurring a streak across the land.
Schwooosshhhh. 
The High-Speed Train flies.
It glides over bridges and marshes, by bays and highways.
Inside, it is cool and quiet.
The train is a small world moving through a larger world.
Passengers read or type, One whispers in her phone: "We’re almost there.
We’ll see you soon."
The High-Speed Train races toward the city on the coast and the passengers prepare for the end of their journey.
They close their books, they pack their bags, they think about what’s next.
A clean bed, a warm dinner.
They are almost home.
And with a slowing turn into the station and an easing of speed and a sigh of brakes and a gentle last thunk, the train stops.

