
























SinputVerbatimfontshape=sl
SoutputVerbatim
ScodeVerbatimfontshape=sl

CodeVerbatim
CodeInputVerbatimfontshape=sl
CodeOutputVerbatim



















Exploring a Causal Link between Language and Cultural Biases


Molly Lewis 
 mollyllewis@gmail.com 
 Department of Psychology  
 University of Wisconsin-Madison Gary Lupyan 
 lupyan@wisc.edu 
 Department of Psychology  
 University of Wisconsin-Madison






The abstract.

Keywords:
IAT, cultural biases, gender, linguistic relativity.


Introduction

- why these effects matter * ``language causal
hypothesis''

Chugh, D. (2004). Societal and managerial implications of implicit
social cognition: Why milliseconds matter. Social Justice Research, 17,
203-- 222. doi:10.1023/B:SORE.0000027410.26010.40 Rudman, L. A.
(2004). Social justice in our minds, homes, and society: The nature,
causes, and consequences of implicit bias. Social Justice Re- search,
17, 129--142. doi:10.1023/B:SORE.0000027406.32604.f6

correlations are small with explict (oswald 2013), but matter Greenwald
(2015;
https://faculty.washington.edu/agg/pdf/Greenwald,BanajiNosek.JPSP.2015.pdf)

Study 1: Cross-cultural gender bias in implicit
behavior

We quantified the degree of gender bias in a culture using data from the
Implicit Association Task (IAT; Greenwald, McGhee,  Schwartz, 1998).
The IAT measures the strength of respondents' implicit associations
between two pairs of concepts (e.g., male-career/female-family
vs. male-family/female-career). The underlying assumption of the measure
is that concepts that are represented as more similar to each other
should be easier to pair together in a behavioral task, compared to two
concepts that are relatively dissimilar. Concepts are paired in the task
by assigning them to the same response keys in a 2AFC categorization
task. In the critical blocks of the task, concepts are assigned to keys
in a way that is either bias-congruent (i.e. Key A = male/career; Key B
= female/family) or bias-incongruent (i.e. Key A = male/family; Key B =
female/career). Participants are then presented with a word related to
one of the four concepts and asked to classify it as quickly as possible
by responding with one of the two keys. Slower reaction times in the
bias-incongruent blocks relative to the bias-congruent blocks are
interpreted as indicating an implicit association between the
corresponding concepts (i.e. a bias to associate male with career, and
female with family).

Method

We analyzed an existing IAT dataset collected online by Project Implicit
(https://implicit.harvard.edu/implicit/; Nosek, Banaji, 
Greenwald,
2002) .
Our analysis included all gender-career IAT scores collected from
respondents between 2005 and 2016 who had complete data and were located
in countries with more than 400 total respondents (N = 772,467).
We further restricted our sample based on participants' reaction times
and errors using the same criteria described in Nosek, Banjai, and
Greenwald (2002, pg. 104). Our final sample included 663,709
participants from 48 countries, with a median of 998 participants per
Country. Note that although the respondents were from largely
non-English speaking countries, the IAT was conducted in English. We do
not have language background data from the participants, but we assume
that most respondents from non-English speaking countries were native
speakers of the dominant language of the country and L2 speakers of
English.

Several measures have been used in the literature to quantify gender
biases from reaction time to congruent and incongruent blocks. Here, we
used the most robust measure, D-score, which quantifies the difference
between critical blocks for each participant while controlling for
individual differences in response time (Greenwald, Nosek,  Banaji,
2003). For each country, we calculated an effect size as the mean
D-score divided by its standard deviation (Cohen's d); larger
values indicate greater bias.

In addition to the implicit measure, we also analyzed an explicit
measure of gender bias. After completing the IAT, participants were
asked, ``How strongly do you associate the following with males and
females?'' for both the words ``career'' and ``family.'' Participants
indicated their response on a Likert scale ranging from female (1) to
male (7). We calculated an explicit gender bias score for each
participant as the Career response minus the Family response, such that
greater values indicate a greater bias to associate males with family.

We expected that countries with greater gender equality would have
participants with lower implicit and explicit gender biases. As a
measure of gender equality, we used the Women's Peace and Security Index
(WPS, 2017), which measures inclusion, justice, and security of women by
country, with larger values indicating higher gender equality.

Results












Broadly, we replicate the three patterns of findings in the literature
on the gender-career IAT (Nosek et al., 2002). First, participants
overall showed a bias to associate men with career and females with
family (d = 1.08). Figure 1 shows the mean effect size for each
of the 48 countries in our sample, with participants from all countries
showing a gender bias (M = 1.05; SD = 0.07). Second,
implicit and explicit bias measures were moderately correlated both at
the level of individual participants (r = 0.15; p
 .00001) and at the level of countries (r = 0.31;
p = 0.03). Third, consistent with previous findings (Nosek et
al., 2002), the magnitude of the implicit bias is larger for female
participants compared to males (d = 0.26; p 
.00001).












Our independent measure of gender equality---the Women's Peace and
Security Index---was uncorrelated with explicit bias (r = -0.01;
p = 0.96). Counter to our expectations, we found that countries
such as the Netherlands, with allegedly greatest gender equality, have
participants with the highest implicit gender bias according to the IAT
(r = 0.46; p .01; Fig. X).

Discussion

In Study 1, we replicate previously reported patterns of gender bias in
the gender-career IAT literature, with roughly comparable effect sizes
(c.f. Nosek, et al., 2002: overall effect: d = .72;
explicit-implict correlation: r = .17; participant gender effect:
d = .1). The weak correlation between explicit and implicit
measures is consistent with claims that these two measures tap into
different cognitive constructs (Oswald, Mitchell, Blanton, Jaccard, 
Tetlock, 2013).

The novel finding from Study 1 is the direction of the correlation
between objective gender equality of a country (as measured by the WPS)
and implicit gender bias---participants in countries with greater gender
equality have greater implicit gender bias. This robust
correlation is particularly surprising given that the English was likely
the second language for most of the participants in our sample
introducing additional noise into the measurement. In the General
Discusion, we speculate about possible reasons for this positive
correlation.

Study 2: Cross-cultural gender bias in
language

In Study 2, we ask whether participants' psychological gender biases --
implicit and explicit -- are correlated with the semantic structure of
their native languages. For example, are the semantics of the words
``woman'' and ``family'' more similar in Hungarian than in English?
Evidence for a positive correlation between psychological and semantic
gender biases would suggest either that psychological gender biases
derive partly from exposure to language or that language reflects
pre-existing gender biases. Importantly, we expect psychological and
semantic gender biases to be correlated regardless of the direction of
the relationship between psychological and objective gender bias found
in Study 1.

To model semantics, we turn to a machine-learning methods for deriving
lexical semantics from large corpora of text: auto-encoding neural
network models. The underlying assumption of these models is that the
meaning of a word can be described by the words it tends to co-occur
with -- an approach known as distributional semantics (Firth, 1957).
Under this approach, a word like ``dog'' is represented as more similar
to ``hound'' than ``banana'' because it occurs with words more in common
with ``hound'' than ``banana'' where co-occurrences are effectively
defined at multiple hierarchical levels.

Recent developments in machine learning allow the idea of distributional
semantics to be implemented in a way that both takes into account many
features of local language structure while remaining computationally
tractable. The best known of these word embedding models is
word2vec (Mikolov, Chen, Corrado,  Dean, 2013). The model takes
as input a corpus of text and outputs a vector for each word
corresponding to its semantics. From these vectors, we can derive a
measure of the semantic similarity between two words by taking the
distance between their vectors (e.g., cosine distance). Similarity
measures estimated from these models have been shown to be highly
correlated with human judgements of word similarity (e.g., Hill,
Reichart,  Korhonen, 2015), though more for some forms of similarity
than others (D. Chen, Peterson,  Griffiths, 2017).

It turns out that various human biases as measured by the IAT can be
predicted from distributional semantics models like word2vec. Caliskan,
Bryson, and Narayanan (2017; henceforth CBN) measured the
distance in vector space between the same sets of words that are
presented to participants in the IAT task. CBN found that these distance
measures are highly correlated with reaction times in the behavioral IAT
task. For example, in the career-gender IAT, CBN find a bias in the
semantics of English to associate males with career and females with
family, suggesting that the biases measured by the IAT are also found in
the lexical semantics of natural language.

In Study 2, we use the same method described by CBN to measure the
biases in the semantics of the natural languages spoken in the countries
of participants in Study 1. While CBN only analyzed biases for models
trained on English, we extend their method to compare biases across a
wide number of languages. To do this, we take advantage of a set of
models that have been pre-trained on a corpus of Wikipedia text in a
large number of languages (Bojanowski, Grave, Joulin,  Mikolov, 2016).
In Study 2a, we replicate the CBN findings with the Wikipedia corpus; In
Study 2b, we show that the implicit gender biases reported in Study 1
for individual countries are correlated with the biases found in the
semantics of the natural language spoken by those participants.

Study 2a: Replication of Caliskan, et
al. (2017)

Method

We use a word embedding model that has been pre-trained model on the
corpus of English Wikipedia using the fastText algorithm (Bojanowski et
al.,
2016) .
The model contains 2,519,370 words with each word represented by a 300
dimensional vector.

Using the Wikpedia-trained model, we calculate an effect size for each
of the 10 biases reported in CBN which correspond to behavioral IAT
results existing in the literature:
flowers/insects--pleasant/unpleasant,
instruments/weapons--pleasant/unpleasant,
European-American/Afro-American--pleasant/unpleasant, 
males/females--career/family, math/arts--male/female,
science/arts--male/female,
mental-disease/physical-disease--permanent/temporary, and
young/old--pleasant/unpleasant (labeled as WEAT 1-10 in CBN). We
calculate the bias using the same effect size metric described in CBN, a
standardized difference score of the relative similarity of the target
words to the target attributes (i.e. relative similarity of male to
career vs. relative similarity of female to career). This measure is
analogous the behavioral effect size measure in Study 1 and, like for
the behavioral effect size, larger values indicate larger gender bias.

Results












Figure 2 shows the effect size measures derived from the Wikipedia
corpus plotted against effect size estimates reported by CBN from two
different models (trained on the Common Crawl and Google News corpora).
With the exception of biases related to race and age, effect sizes from
the Wikipedia corpus are comparable to those reported by CBN. In
particular, for the gender-career IAT -- the bias relevant to our
current purposes -- we estimate the effect size to be 1.78, while CBN
estimates it as 1.81 (Common Crawl) and 1.89 (Google News).

Study 2b: Predicting implicit bias with language
IAT

With our corpus validated, we next turn toward examining the
relationship between psychological and linguistic gender biases. In
Study 2b, we estimate the magnitude of the gender-career bias in each of
the languages spoken in the countries described in Study 1 and compare
it with estimates of behavioral gender bias from Study 1. If language
causally influences psychological gender bias, we predict these two
measures should be positively correlated.

Method












For each country included in Study 1, we identified the most frequently
spoken language in those countries using the CIA factbook (Central
Intelligence Agency, 2017). This included a total of 31 unique
languages. For a sample of 20 of these languages (see Fig. 3), we had
native speakers translate the set of 32 words from the gender-career
IAT, with a slight
modification .
The original gender-career IAT task (Nosek et al., 2002) used proper
names to cue the male and female categories (e.g. ``John,'' ``Amy'').
Because there are not direct translation equivalents of proper names
across languages, we instead used a set of generic gendered words which
had been previously used for a different version of the gender IAT
(e.g., ``male,'' ``man,'' ``female,'' ``woman;'' Nosek et al., 2002).

We used these translations to calculate an effect size from the models
trained on Wikipedia in each language, using the same method as in Study
2a. We then compared the effect size of the linguistic gender bias to
the behavioral gender bias, averaging across countries that spoke the
same language and weighting by sample size.

Results

Implicit IAT gender bias effect sizes were positively correlated with
effect sizes of gender bias estimated from the native language embedding
model (r = 0.48; p = 0.03; Fig. 3), suggesting that
countries that have more gender bias encoded in their language also have
a larger psychological gender bias. Explicit gender bias was not
reliably correlated with language gender bias (r = 0.23; p
= 0.33).

Discussion

Study 3: Grammar and Gender
Bias

Study 2 suggests that psychological gender bias and linguistic gender
bias are correlated, consistent with the idea that language may play a
causal factor in shaping participants psychological gender bias.
Nevertheless, Study 2 is also consistent with a second hypothesis in
which the causal influence goes the opposition direction: greater
psychological gender biases cause greater gender biases becoming encoded
in the statistics of the language. In Study 3, we test the
language-causal hypothesis more directly by examining whether there is a
relationship between psychological gender bias and language along a
linguistic dimension that is unlikely to be a subject of rapid change --
namely, grammatical gender. While of course grammars do change, they are
less malleable than the semantics of words, and thus less likely to be
affected by psychological biases. We predict, therefore, that if there
is some causal influence of language on psychological biases languages
that encode gender grammatically will tend to have larger psychological
gender biases.

Method

For each of the 31 languages represented in our sample of participants
(Study 1), we coded whether gender was encoded grammatically. We used a
coarse binary coding scheme, categorizing a language as encoding
grammatical gender if it made any gender distinction on noun classes
(male, female, common or neuter), and as not encoding gender
grammatically otherwise. We coded this distinction on the basis of the
WALS typological database (Feature 32a; Dryer  Haspelmath, 2013),
where available, and consulted additional resources as necessary. Our
sample included 18 languages that encoded grammatical gender and 13 that
did not.

Results












Languages that encode grammatical gender tended to have speakers with
greater gender bias, as measured through the behavioral IAT (Study 1;
M = 1.07; SD = 0.08) compared to speakers of languages
that do not gramamtically encode gender (M = 1.02; SD =
0.07), though this difference was not reliable (d = 0.69
[-0.08, 1.45], t(27.53) = 1.89; p = 0.07; Fig. 4). In
a post-hoc analysis, we excluded outliers located more than two standard
deviations from the group mean (Hungarian and Hindi). With these
exclusions, we find a reliable difference between language types
(d = 1.3 [0.46, 2.15]; t(25.12) = 3.46; p
 .01). In addition, we find the same pattern for language IAT
(Study 2), with languages that encode gender grammatically tending to
have larger language IAT gender biases, compared to those who do not
(t(17.68) = 2.18; p = 0.04).

Discussion

not mutually exclusive grammar and embedding models show account
for the same biases. we can do this with other biases can examine
more directly the words driving the effect (more thatn just the IAT
effect) * Mechanism: implicit grammar (shared caregory with males);
explicit grammar (essentialism); general semantics

Conclusion

References

  

refs
ref-bojanowski2016enriching
Bojanowski, P., Grave, E., Joulin, A.,  Mikolov, T. (2016). Enriching
word vectors with subword information. arXiv Preprint
arXiv:1607.04606.

ref-caliskan2017semantics
Caliskan, A., Bryson, J. J.,  Narayanan, A. (2017). Semantics derived
automatically from language corpora contain human-like biases.
Science, 356(6334), 183--186.

ref-ciafactbook
Central Intelligence Agency. (2017). The World Factbook. Retrieved from
ttps://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/index.html

ref-chen2017evaluating
Chen, D., Peterson, J. C.,  Griffiths, T. L. (2017). Evaluating
vector-space models of analogy. arXiv Preprint arXiv:1705.04416.

ref-wals
Dryer, M. S.,  Haspelmath, M. (Eds.). (2013). WALS online.
Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology. Retrieved
from http://wals.info/

ref-firth1957synopsis
Firth, J. (1957). A synopsis of linguistic theory 1930-1955 in studies
in linguistic analysis, philological society. Oxford. reprinted in
Palmer, F.,(ed. 1968), Selected Papers of JR Firth, Longman, Harlow.

ref-greenwald1998measuring
Greenwald, A. G., McGhee, D. E.,  Schwartz, J. L. (1998). Measuring
individual differences in implicit cognition: The implicit association
test. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74(6),
1464.

ref-greenwald2003understanding
Greenwald, A. G., Nosek, B. A.,  Banaji, M. R. (2003). Understanding
and using the Implicit Association Test: An improved scoring algorithm.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85(2), 197.

ref-hill2015simlex
Hill, F., Reichart, R.,  Korhonen, A. (2015). Simlex-999: Evaluating
semantic models with (genuine) similarity estimation.
Computational Linguistics, 41(4), 665--695.

ref-mikolov2013efficient
Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G.,  Dean, J. (2013). Efficient
estimation of word representations in vector space. arXiv Preprint
arXiv:1301.3781.

ref-nosek2002harvesting
Nosek, B. A., Banaji, M. R.,  Greenwald, A. G. (2002). Harvesting
implicit group attitudes and beliefs from a demonstration web site.
Group Dynamics: Theory, Research, and Practice, 6(1), 101.

ref-oswald2013predicting
Oswald, F. L., Mitchell, G., Blanton, H., Jaccard, J.,  Tetlock, P. E.
(2013). Predicting ethnic and racial discrimination: A meta-analysis of
iat criterion studies. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 105(2), 171.

ref-wps
Women's Peace and Security Index. (2017). Retrieved from
https://giwps.georgetown.edu/


